---
title: The intangible effects of walls
speaker: Alexandra Auer
description: >-
 More barriers exist now than at the end of World War II, says designer Alexandra
 Auer. And when you erect one wall, you unwittingly create a second -- an "us"
 versus "them" partition in the mind that compromises our collective safety. With
 intriguing results from her social design project focused on two elementary
 schools separated by a fence, Auer encourages us to dismantle our biases and
 regain perspective on all the things we have in common.
date: 2019-02-01
tags: ["design","society","identity","social-change","community","humanity","tedx"]
slug: alexandra_auer_the_intangible_effects_of_walls_apr_2020
---

Humankind loves to build walls. Have you ever noticed that? We build walls for everything:
for shelter, for protection, for privacy. Over the past 70 years, the number of barriers
between countries has doubled. Right now, there are more walls than at the end of the
Second World War, more than during the Cold War. Growing up in Germany, the fall of the
Berlin Wall always felt to me like the introduction of a new world, a world without
barriers. But since the attacks of 9/11, the construction has experienced an extreme rise.
Since then, the amount has doubled, with about 30 new structures that were planned or
built. Walls and fences are often built with the intention of security, security from
another group of people, from crime, from illegal trades. But walls and fences only
provide us with a feeling of security, which is different from real security. Even though
they might make us feel safe, the structures themselves can't protect us. Instead, they do
something else: they separate.

They create an us and a them. They establish an enemy. Walls make us build a second wall
in our head, a mental wall. And those mental walls slowly make us lose sight of all the
things we have in common with the people on the other side. The other way around, mental
walls can grow so strong that they encourage us to build, keep or strengthen physical
walls. Physical and mental walls are closely interlinked, and one almost always comes with
the other. It's a constant cycle: physical walls empower mental walls, and mental walls
empower physical walls until at one point one part falls away, and the cycle is
disrupted. When the Berlin Wall was being built, it was hard to tell who the wall was
facing, because the people living around it identified as one. There was no us and them.
There was no others. During the time of separation, both sides developed differently and
formed individual identities. All of a sudden, there was an us and a them.

A mental wall was built, and when the Berlin Wall fell again in 1989, this mental wall in
the head of the people stayed. Eastern Germans had to be reintegrated into their own
country, and even though they didn't have to move places, many still today feel like they
have never fully arrived. Those remaining effects of the mental wall are also measurable. A
study from the Freie University of Berlin in 2005 shows that even 15 years after the
reunification, Germans still believed that cities on the other side of the former wall are
further away than they really are. The interesting thing is that they found a link between
political attitude and estimation of the distance. The more a participant was against the
German reunification, the further away they estimated cities to be. It's the mental wall
which keeps cities on the other side far away, and the higher and stronger this mental
wall, the more difficult they seem to be reached. I tried to repeat this study with a group
of young Germans who grew up without the wall to see if these effects are still measurable
nowadays.

And the results show that this generation, my generation, is just kind of bad at geography
in general —

East and West. But in our defense, this could be seen as an improvement, right? We never
experienced the actual wall. This physical barrier was never able to make us build a
mental wall in the first place. I would love to take this as a serious indication that
there could be a future without a mental wall dividing Germany, but I think we have to
face reality: this one wall could be disappearing, but in the meanwhile, a billion others
are constructed. One global trend we are currently experiencing is the rise of gated
communities. And in a way, gated communities can be seen the same exact way as countries,
just on the small scale — neighborhoods surrounded by walls and fences to protect citizens
from other citizens — and the only difference is, it's by choice. But the physical and
mental effects on the people living inside and the people kept outside are the same,
separating cities, neighborhoods and even playgrounds. In the spring of last year, I worked
on a design project in Brussels at two elementary schools where this was the
case.

Both the schools share an entrance and the schoolyard. Both schools teach in Dutch. But
one school is mainly visited by Belgian children, and the other school, by immigrant
children. The schools are separated by walls and fences, leaving the children no point of
interaction other than this fence on the schoolyard that separates them. When I started to
work there, it made me sad to see children having to stand at a fence to talk to their
friend on the other side. But what's even worse is that most of the children will never
get the opportunity to even make a friend on the other side. School should be the place
where children, all children, come together and learn — learn from the teacher, but more
importantly, learn from each other. And the more diversity, the more there is to learn. In
fact, school might be the only time in our lives where establishing a contact despite
social differences is even possible.

Separating children during this time of their development will make integration extremely
difficult, if not impossible. And yet, somehow, I seem to be the only one having a problem
with this fence in Brussels. Most of the parents, teachers and children stopped seeing or
at least questioning the structure. It's just how it is. Nobody has ever seen it
differently. And people are in favor of it. I once asked a boy if he would like to play
with the other side, and he said, "No." Then I asked if he would play with them if the
fence wasn't there, and he said, "Probably." But then he quickly added that the fence
should stay, because the other side is mean and they never give back his ball. It's funny,
because I talked to children from both sides, and everyone told me that the other side is
mean because they never give back the ball. The children on both sides dislike each other,
and there are regularly arguments breaking out at this fence, which is also the main
reason why people feel the need for it to be there: it protects the children from each
other, or at least their toys, and it prevents chaos.

At some point, the children started to crawl beneath the fence to get their ball back, and
the reaction of the schools was to put these metal plates there. Now they climb over. I
don't know what came first in Brussels: a mental wall that grew too strong that it made
them build a physical fence, or this fence that now emphasizes the social differences,
even on the schoolyard. But what I did know when I started to work there was that I wanted
to change something about the situation. I wanted to show both sides again how much they
have in common. For children, this isn't very hard, because even though one schoolyard
speaks Dutch and the other schoolyard, a mix of French, Turkish and Arabic, they all speak
the universal language of play. And it turned out the desire to play is a lot stronger
than all the supposed differences between them. I installed different games at the fence,
which turned it into an interface, a common ground, instead of a barrier.

And all of a sudden, children were drawing together, exchanging pencils and talking on the
phone. Especially the phones were a great success, because they were so amazed by the fact
that they can hear the other side through this device that they couldn't stop speaking. In
the case of an elementary school, parents play a very big role in shaping the everyday
life and the environment of their children. So I knew that if I wanted to make a
difference, I had to somehow show them, too, how much they have in common with the other
side. But for parents, this was a lot more difficult, because most of them speak different
languages, work different jobs with different incomes, live in different social circles,
believe in different religions, experience different cultures and share different values.
And then there was me, a student, different in all of these aspects again. So how could I
show them how much they have in common? I chose not to convince them myself but by letting
their own children do the talking.

I designed a picture exhibition on the schoolyard showing them their children playing
together through the fence. At the end of this exhibition, I asked people to write down
their thoughts, ideas and wishes on these big wooden boxes, and I labeled the boxes with,
"What do you think?" A lot of people wrote "Yes" on it. Yes, what? I never mentioned my
opinion or an action that should follow, so which question were they answering with yes?
When I asked, they said yes, the fence should go. Yes, we want to play with the other
side. The pictures implied enough to answer a question that was never proposed. People
were seeing the absurdity of the situation again and felt how unnecessary this fence is
without me forcing an opinion on them. The exhibition showed the two sides their
similarities for once. That day, there was no us and them, there was no others. The mental
wall started to crumble. I chose the word "crumbling," because breaking a mental wall is a
long journey, and breaking a mental wall can be a lot more difficult than simply tearing
down the physical one.

We have to challenge our opinion and beliefs and maybe even admit our own wrongs. So what
happened in Brussels was a big step, a step that has been taking generations in
Germany. There are many examples from all over the world telling the same story I
experienced in Brussels and Germany, enough examples from which we could have learned. But
still, we seek walls as solutions for problems that they cannot solve, because walls don't
fight the root of our problem. If anything, they reduce the symptoms. So the next time you
are planning to build a wall or you are planning to support someone who wants to build a
wall, I want you to remember the impact you are really having. Because, this simple
structure will hardly create more security. Instead, it will affect the people living with
it every day, people who, despite the geographic border, often share a lot of culture and
values. For them, you are not building one wall but two, two walls which will take decades
and generations to overcome again. Thank you.

<!--
ad_duration=3.33
comment_count=38
event="TEDxEindhoven"
external_duration=0
external_start_time=0
has_talk_citation=1
intro_duration=11.82
is_subtitle_required="False"
is_talk_featured="True"
language="en"
language_swap="False"
native_language="en"
number_of_related_talks=6
number_of_speakers=1
number_of_subtitled_videos=11
number_of_tags=7
number_of_talk_download_languages=11
number_of_talk_more_resources=0
number_of_talk_recommendations=0
number_of_talks_take_actions=0
post_ad_duration=0.83
published_timestamp="2020-04-03 20:18:10"
recording_date="2019-02-01"
speaker_description="Social designer"
speaker_is_published=1
speaker_name="Alexandra Auer"
talk_more_resources=[]
talk_name="The intangible effects of walls"
talks_tags=["design","society","identity","social-change","community","humanity","tedx"]
talks_take_action=[]
url_audio="https://download.ted.com/talks/AlexandraAuer_2019X.mp3?apikey=acme-roadrunner"
url_photo_speaker="https://pe.tedcdn.com/images/ted/75cb1e885262edfc33f5459d6922d909f94d2345_254x191.jpg"
url_photo_talk="https://s3.amazonaws.com/talkstar-photos/uploads/2bbc3def-9570-42fc-8d68-e97cfb6ff340/AlexandraAuer_2019X-embed.jpg"
url_webpage="https://www.ted.com/talks/alexandra_auer_the_intangible_effects_of_walls_apr_2020"
video_type_name="TEDx Talk"
-->