---
title: An interview with Mauritius's first female president
speaker: Ameenah Gurib-Fakim and Stephanie Busari
description: >-
 (NOTE: Ameenah Gurib-Fakim stepped down as president of Mauritius in March 2018,
 following accusations that she misused a credit card given to her by a nonprofit.
 Read "Criticisms & Updates" below for more details.) Ameenah Gurib-Fakim was an
 academic and entrepreneur before being appointed president of Mauritius -- the
 first Muslim female head of state in Africa. In a wide-ranging conversation with
 journalist Stephanie Busari, Gurib-Fakim discusses the humble beginnings of her
 political career, what it's like to be both a person of faith and a scientist and
 why we need to value traditional African knowledge, among much more. "I don't
 think you should take yourself seriously," she says. "You need to have trust in
 what you can do, have confidence in yourself and give yourself a set of goals and
 just work towards them."
date: 2017-08-27
tags: ["africa","biodiversity","faith","creativity","government","interview","society","sustainability","politics","social-change","science","women"]
slug: ameenah_gurib_fakim_and_stephanie_busari_an_interview_with_mauritius_s_first_female_president
---

Stephanie Busari: President Ameenah, thank you for joining us. Even as TED speakers go,
you're something of an overachiever. Ameenah Gurib-Fakim: 

SB: You have a PhD in organic chemistry, you were vice chancellor of the University of
Mauritius, a successful entrepreneur, you've won numerous awards for your work in science
and you're the first Muslim female head of state in Africa.

And of course, you're no stranger to the TEDGlobal stage; you gave a talk in 2014. Did you
have any political ambitions at that time? How did you go from academic to president? AGF:
OK, thanks, Stephanie. First of all, I'd like to thank TED for having given me the
opportunity to be here today. And I would also like to thank the government of Tanzania
and the president for the welcome. And also, I'd like to thank the contribution of our
consul, Mr. Rizvi, who's here, has been very supportive for all our stay here. Now, to
answer your question, did I have any ambitions in politics? The straight answer is no. I
did not choose the world of politics; the world of politics chose me. So here I
am.

SB: So, was there ever anything in your journey that ever made you think that one day you
would become president of your country? Did you ever imagine that? AGF: Absolutely not. I
think the journey started immediately after TED, actually. When I went back, this
journalist called me and said, "You know, your name has been cited for the president of
the republic," I said, "Ma'am, you must be mistaken, because I have no ambition
whatsoever." She said, "No, it's serious. Can you come and tell me this in the form of a
declaration? So, OK, you'll come?" So, of course, as good journalists go, the next day I
see my TED picture and, with my name, Ameenah Gurib-Fakim, "For president?" A very small
interrogation mark — and people don't see the interrogation mark, they just see my name
and they see my picture. And that was a sounding board. And again, as you have just said,
it was a very interesting scenario because it was a scenario where they wanted to have
somebody who was credible, had this political neutrality and at the same time, was for a
minority because Islam is a minority religion in Mauritius, because in Mauritius, we
stratify people's origins by virtue of their religious belief.

And — I was a woman. So this made it all very interesting. So there we go, and this whole
campaign started, and then people said, "Why not?" Now, this is very important to note,
Stephanie, because normally, the president is elected after the election. And here we had
a scenario where the name of the president was flagged before the election process, during
the campaign. So when people voted, they knew that at some point, they would have this
Muslim woman president. SB: Does it feel significant to you as a woman to be the first
female president of your country? AGF: It's important for many reasons. I think, obviously,
you just mentioned the terrible statistics of two female presidents in the whole of
Africa. But more importantly, I think it's important also coming from the background I
come from — by background I mean not ethnic, but more academic and entrepreneurial — to be
there, to be that role model for that little girl growing in my village to say, "Yes, it's
possible." It's possible.

It's also important, Stephanie, while I talk about diversity — diversity in the widest
sense of the word. We've seen that whenever there was diversity, whenever there was
openness, whenever there was dialogue, this was the time when societies have been most
productive. When we talk about the Arab Golden Age, we cannot not think of Ibn Sina,
al-Haytham, Averroes, Maimonides. This was a time when cultures, religions — they were
talking to each other. They were at peace with each other. And this was a time when they
were highly productive. So I would say: bring down these walls. SB: Absolutely,
absolutely.

AGF: Virtual or otherwise. SB: Let's also talk about another conflict area which you
straddle quite interestingly. As a woman of faith and also a scientist, you know, faith
and science seem to be at loggerheads. It wasn't always so, but I'm interested to get your
thoughts on how you reconcile both and how they coexist for you personally. AGF: They're
not mutually exclusive. I mean, if you're a scientist, you tend to really look at the
perfection of the human body, the way it functions. If you look at nature as a whole. I'm
still amazed at the perfection with which the entire ecosystem functions together.
However, to the purists, to those who are of faith, they will tell you, "Yes, there has
been evolution." Even the Pope has agreed that evolution exists. But there's always the
question: What came first? What came before this? When we talk about all the various
strata of evolution, we'll always be asking the question, there must be something
before.

So I'm of the opinion that yes, there is this great spiritual force which is guiding the
process, and things like this don't happen by chance. Now, whether you call it
religiosity, whether you call this great spirit by any name — Brahma, Allah, the Holy
Trinity — you name it — but I still think that these two are not mutually exclusive. They
can still coexist with each other. SB: So let's move to one of your passions — science.
You've made no secret of that. And you've always been passionate about science. I read
that when you were a very young girl, you went to a career guidance counselor and told
them you wanted to become a chemist, and they said, "No, it's for boys. Boys do science."
Did that make you even more determined to study science and to succeed in that field? How
did you respond to that? AGF: Well, to begin with, I must say, before I came to that career
guidance officer, I had great teachers who motivated.

And this is something I would like to draw attention to again, to our education system. We
have to do away with this rote learning. We have to ensure that we drive this curiosity in
the child, and they need to be curious. And if we want to move along the line for them to
become great scientists, they need to become more and more curious in everything they
do. So every time — exactly — I went to see the careers guidance, he looked at me and said,
"What do you want to do?" I said, "I want to study chemistry." "Well, you shouldn't study
chemistry because this is for boys. And the next thing, when you come back, there'll be no
job for you." So I went back home, and I had a great cheerleader at home who happens to be
my father. He said, "What do you want to do?" and asked, "What did he say?" I said, "This
is what he said ..." He said, "What are you going to do?" I said, "I'm going to do
chemistry." So there I was. And one thing I will say: one must always follow your
heart.

And my heart was always in chemistry. I did what I was passionate about, and I thought at
some point that I had developed this thinking that if you're passionate about what you do,
you will not have to work a single day in your life, until I realized it was Confucius who
said that.

SB: So do you feel a responsibility, as someone in your position, to encourage young
girls, especially on this continent, to study STEM subjects? Is that something that you
actively work —AGF: You know, over the past two days, Stephanie, we've been hearing a lot
of conversation about the sustainable development goals. We've seen that, for example,
Africa must be food secure, Africa must be energy secure, Africa must be water secure. If
we want to get to that level of development — Agenda 2030 is not very far away — if you
want to have success, we need to have an educated youth in Africa. And again, to be very
cliché: you cannot achieve, you cannot win a football match, if you're going to leave 52
percent of the team outside. It's not possible.

SB: Yes. AGF: So we need highly educated, we need female intuition, and we need to get them
there. And this is where a great deal of effort has to be done to actually motivate them
from a very young age, to tell that girl that she can do anything. And if the message
comes from her father, if the message comes from her brother, it's even much more
powerful. We need to tell her that anything is possible and she can do it. We need to
build her self-confidence from a very early age, but more importantly, we also need to
actually look at the books, because there are too many stereotypes. Last year, I was very
shocked when I went to a debate on Women's Day. They had a survey, and they were asking
these girls how many women inventors we have, how many women scientists do we have. And
you'd be shocked that hardly anyone knew that Ada Lovelace was there behind computer
science, that Marie Curie still remains iconic with two Nobel prizes.

So there's a lot of homework to do to actually make — to remove all these gender biases at
a very young age; instill that confidence in that girl; to tell her that she can do as
well if not better than her brother. SB: Yes.

Thank you. So, let's move on to an area that I know you've been very active in, which is
the issue of biodiversity. You've been quite clear that this is an area that Africa must
embrace. We have an abundance of rich herbal traditions and plants that could be developed
into a big pharmaceutical industry. Can you tell us a little bit of how you've been using
your expertise to harness growth in this area? AGF: Thank you. Yesterday, I was listening
to one of the talks; it was the talk about the need for Africa to turn into a knowledge
economy. Africa has got very rich traditions. Sub-Saharan Africa, southern Africa, has got
over 5,000 medicinal plant species, not harnessed. And, in fact, at the TED talk I gave in
2014, I came out with one sentence: "Biodiversity underpins life on earth." And if we
don't look after this biodiversity, if we don't protect it, if we don't actually harness
it in the right way, we are threatening our own livelihoods on this planet.

When we talk about the contribution from countries of the north to the Green Fund for the
protection of our planet, it is not charity. It is to ensure our own collective
livelihoods on this planet. So this is something that must be addressed. Now, again, when
you talk about getting this biodiversity of Africa working for us, you'd be shocked to
know that out of the 1,100 blockbuster drugs that we have on the market, only 83 come from
African plants. Why is this so? Because we are responsible; us Africans. We don't value
our own traditional knowledge. We don't give it the same status as allopathic medicine.
Look at what China has done. China has given the same status for traditional Chinese
medicine as allopathic medicine, as of 2016. Our governments, our people, have not
documented, have not taken this knowledge seriously. If you want to get serious about
Africa becoming a knowledge continent, this is something that we need to address very
seriously, we need to start documenting, we need to start codifying this knowledge, and
unfortunately, we are racing against time because tradition in Africa is that the
transmission has always been oral.

So we need to get our act together and make it happen. SB: So there's really a sense of
urgency around this. AGF: Yes.

SB: And have you done anything yourself in respect to documenting —AGF: Yes, I definitely
did. When I started my career in academia, one of the first things I did was I documented
precisely these plants. And I'll tell you one thing — it was not perceived to be very
serious, because here I was, in synthetic organic chemistry, going out there, talking to
these grandmothers, documenting their recipes. I mean, you can't be serious — bringing
weeds in the lab, and say, "We're going to be working on these." Are we going to get
results? So it was really a race against prejudice to try to take people's — bring them to
the table and say, "Look, this is very important." But I'm glad I did, because by that
time, you start developing a crocodile skin, especially when you're a woman in the lab
doing different things. You know — you become suspect. So I documented it; I'm very happy
I did. And now, almost 20 years since the documentation, it now constitutes prior art, and
is now very well-documented at WIPO, and it is now the information which, subsequently, my
company actually started working on as well. SB: So, I watched you in the makeup room
taking selfies with the makeup artist, and just being generally very accessible.

And it strikes me that you're not the kind of typical, big-man, African leader. You seem
very —AGF: You just demoted me. You called me a man.

SB: I mean your style —

Your style seems to be very accessible and quite unassuming. So is this — I mean, people
tend to ask women leaders if their gender has a bearing on the way they rule, or the way
they lead. Does that apply to you? AGF: You know, I've never taken myself seriously. SB: OK.
That's good.

AGF: I still don't. And I don't think you should take yourself seriously. You need to have
trust in what you can do, have confidence in yourself and give yourself a set of goals and
just work towards them. So the goal I've given myself is, OK, I'm leading my third life —
because I've been an academic, I've been an entrepreneur, now I'm here. I'm hoping to have
a fourth life. So put these to work for the continent. And this is why I have chosen to
give my voice to so many initiatives that would help the youth of Africa become
tech-savvy, become science-savvy, because as I said earlier on, up until they get to grips
with science, with whatever is around — media, technology, you name it, all calls for a
good grounding in science, technology and innovation. I think we'll be here, 10 years, 20
years down the line, having the same conversation. SB: Let's talk quickly about the
challenges of leadership and governance.

It's hard to ignore that there's corruption on this continent with some of our leaders.
How have you confronted that in your role, and what experiences can you share with us
around this issue? AGF: We've had corruption — corruption doesn't exist only in Africa.
Where there is a corruptee, there is a corrupter. Right? It's always a two-way process. We
have focused in my country, we are working very hard towards doing something about
corruption, but, you know, they also have great people in Africa. Why do we always focus
on the negative? Why don't we talk about ... I want to bring on board, for example, the
great quotes of Nelson Mandela. His legacy is still very much alive. We have people in —
even in Tanzania, we've had Julius Nyerere, he have Nkrumah, we have Kenyatta, we have all
these people who have been champions of Africa. I think we need to take pages of their
book and see. In fact, Julius Nyerere himself had been a great advocate for science when
he said that "science will make deserts bloom." So these are some of the founding fathers
of this continent; we need to take pages from them and move ahead.

SB: Thank you very much, President Fakim. AGF: Thank you.

<!--
ad_duration=3.33
comment_count=21
event="TEDGlobal 2017"
external_start_time=0
has_talk_citation=0
intro_duration=11.82
is_subtitle_required="False"
is_talk_featured="True"
language="en"
language_swap="False"
native_language="en"
number_of_related_talks=6
number_of_speakers=2
number_of_subtitled_videos=14
number_of_tags=12
number_of_talk_download_languages=15
number_of_talk_more_resources=1
number_of_talk_recommendations=0
number_of_talks_take_actions=0
post_ad_duration=0.83
published_timestamp="2017-11-08 16:01:57"
recording_date="2017-08-27"
speaker_description="President of Mauritius"
speaker_is_published=1
speaker_name="Ameenah Gurib-Fakim and Stephanie Busari"
talk_name="An interview with Mauritius's first female president"
talks_tags=["africa","biodiversity","faith","creativity","government","interview","society","sustainability","politics","social-change","science","women"]
talks_take_action=[]
url_audio="https://download.ted.com/talks/AmeenahGuribFakim_2017G.mp3?apikey=acme-roadrunner"
url_photo_speaker="https://pe.tedcdn.com/images/ted/a466b87aab99875822eeb7c29536f6c11741b9f3_254x191.jpg"
url_photo_talk="https://s3.amazonaws.com/talkstar-photos/uploads/51c2ac90-8d81-4e1d-b786-caf8e3a3c21d/AmeenahGuribFakim_2017G-embed.jpg"
url_webpage="https://www.ted.com/talks/ameenah_gurib_fakim_and_stephanie_busari_an_interview_with_mauritius_s_first_female_president"
video_type_name="TED Stage Talk"
-->