---
title: Using nature to grow batteries
speaker: Angela Belcher
description: >-
 Inspired by an abalone shell, Angela Belcher programs viruses to make elegant
 nanoscale structures that humans can use. Selecting for high-performing genes
 through directed evolution, she's produced viruses that can construct powerful
 new batteries, clean hydrogen fuels and record-breaking solar cells. In her talk,
 she shows us how it's done.
date: 2011-01-14
tags: ["dna","tedx","alternative-energy","biology","evolution","genetics","nature","virus","science"]
slug: angela_belcher_using_nature_to_grow_batteries
---

I thought I'd talk a little bit about how nature makes materials. I brought along with me
an abalone shell. This abalone shell is a biocomposite material that's 98 percent by mass
calcium carbonate and two percent by mass protein. Yet, it's 3,000 times tougher than its
geological counterpart. And a lot of people might use structures like abalone shells, like
chalk. I've been fascinated by how nature makes materials, and there's a lot of secrets to
how they do such an exquisite job. Part of it is that these materials are macroscopic in
structure, but they're formed at the nano scale. They're formed at the nano scale, and
they use proteins that are coded by the genetic level that allow them to build these
really exquisite structures. So something I think is very fascinating is: What if you could
give life to non-living structures, like batteries and like solar cells? What if they had
some of the same capabilities that an abalone shell did, in terms of being able to build
really exquisite structures at room temperature and room pressure, using nontoxic
chemicals and adding no toxic materials back into the environment?

So that's kind of the vision that I've been thinking about. And so what if you could grow
a battery in a Petri dish? Or what if you could give genetic information to a battery so
that it could actually become better as a function of time, and do so in an
environmentally friendly way? And so, going back to this abalone shell, besides being
nanostructured, one thing that's fascinating is, when a male and female abalone get
together, they pass on the genetic information that says, "This is how to build an
exquisite material. Here's how to do it at room temperature and pressure, using nontoxic
materials." Same with diatoms, which are shown right here, which are glasseous structures.
Every time the diatoms replicate, they give the genetic information that says, "Here's how
to build glass in the ocean that's perfectly nanostructured." And you can do it the same,
over and over again." So what if you could do the same thing with a solar cell or a
battery?

I like to say my favorite biomaterial is my four year old. But anyone who's ever had or
knows small children knows, they're incredibly complex organisms. If you wanted to
convince them to do something they don't want to do, it's very difficult. So when we think
about future technologies, we actually think of using bacteria and viruses — simple
organisms. Can you convince them to work with a new toolbox, so they can build a structure
that will be important to me? Also, when we think about future technologies, we start with
the beginning of Earth. Basically, it took a billion years to have life on Earth. And very
rapidly, they became multi-cellular, they could replicate, they could use photosynthesis
as a way of getting their energy source. But it wasn't until about 500 million years ago —
during the Cambrian geologic time period — that organisms in the ocean started making hard
materials. Before that, they were all soft, fluffy structures.

It was during this time that there was increased calcium, iron and silicon in the
environment, and organisms learned how to make hard materials. So that's what I would like
to be able to do, convince biology to work with the rest of the periodic table. Now, if you
look at biology, there's many structures like DNA, antibodies, proteins and ribosomes
you've heard about, that are nanostructured — nature already gives us really exquisite
structures on the nano scale. What if we could harness them and convince them to not be an
antibody that does something like HIV? What if we could convince them to build a solar
cell for us? Here are some examples. Natural shells, natural biological materials. The
abalone shell here. If you fracture it, you can look at the fact that it's nanostructured.
There's diatoms made out of SiO2, and there are magnetotactic bacteria that make small,
single-domain magnets used for navigation.

What all these have in common is these materials are structured at the nano scale, and
they have a DNA sequence that codes for a protein sequence that gives them the blueprint
to be able to build these really wonderful structures. Now, going back to the abalone
shell, the abalone makes this shell by having these proteins. These proteins are very
negatively charged. They can pull calcium out of the environment, and put down a layer of
calcium and then carbonate, calcium and carbonate. It has the chemical sequences of amino
acids which says, "This is how to build the structure. Here's the DNA sequence, here's the
protein sequence in order to do it." So an interesting idea is, what if you could take any
material you wanted, or any element on the periodic table, and find its corresponding DNA
sequence, then code it for a corresponding protein sequence to build a structure, but not
build an abalone shell — build something that nature has never had the opportunity to work
with yet. And so here's the periodic table.

I absolutely love the periodic table. Every year for the incoming freshman class at MIT, I
have a periodic table made that says, "Welcome to MIT. Now you're in your
element."

And you flip it over, and it's the amino acids with the pH at which they have different
charges. And so I give this out to thousands of people. And I know it says MIT and this is
Caltech, but I have a couple extra if people want it. I was really fortunate to have
President Obama visit my lab this year on his visit to MIT, and I really wanted to give
him a periodic table. So I stayed up at night and talked to my husband, "How do I give
President Obama a periodic table? What if he says, 'Oh, I already have one,' or, 'I've
already memorized it?'"

So he came to visit my lab and looked around — it was a great visit. And then afterward, I
said, "Sir, I want to give you the periodic table, in case you're ever in a bind and need
to calculate molecular weight."

I thought "molecular weight" sounded much less nerdy than "molar mass."

And he looked at it and said, "Thank you. I'll look at it periodically."

Later in a lecture that he gave on clean energy, he pulled it out and said, "And people at
MIT, they give out periodic tables." So ...So basically what I didn't tell you is that
about 500 million years ago, the organisms started making materials, but it took them
about 50 million years to get good at it — 50 million years to learn how to perfect how to
make that abalone shell. And that's a hard sell to a graduate student: "I have this great
project ... 50 million years ..." So we had to develop a way of trying to do this more
rapidly. And so we use a nontoxic virus called M13 bacteriophage, whose job is to infect
bacteria. Well, it has a simple DNA structure that you can go in and cut and paste
additional DNA sequences into it, and by doing that, it allows the virus to express random
protein sequences. This is pretty easy biotechnology, and you could basically do this a
billion times. So you can have a billion different viruses that are all genetically
identical, but they differ from each other based on their tips, on one sequence, that
codes for one protein.

Now if you take all billion viruses, and put them in one drop of liquid, you can force
them to interact with anything you want on the periodic table. And through a process of
selection evolution, you can pull one of a billion that does something you'd like it to
do, like grow a battery or a solar cell. Basically, viruses can't replicate themselves;
they need a host. Once you find that one out of a billion, you infect it into a bacteria,
and make millions and billions of copies of that particular sequence. The other thing
that's beautiful about biology is that biology gives you really exquisite structures with
nice link scales. These viruses are long and skinny, and we can get them to express the
ability to grow something like semiconductors or materials for batteries. Now, this is a
high-powered battery that we grew in my lab. We engineered a virus to pick up carbon
nanotubes. One part of the virus grabs a carbon nanotube, the other part of the virus has
a sequence that can grow an electrode material for a battery, and then it wires itself to
the current collector.

And so through a process of selection evolution, we went from being able to have a virus
that made a crummy battery to a virus that made a good battery to a virus that made a
record-breaking, high-powered battery that's all made at room temperature, basically at
the benchtop. That battery went to the White House for a press conference, and I brought
it here. You can see it in this case that's lighting this LED. Now if we could scale this,
you could actually use it to run your Prius, which is kind of my dream — to be able to
drive a virus-powered car.

But basically you can pull one out of a billion, and make lots of amplifications to it.
Basically, you make an amplification in the lab, and then you get it to self-assemble into
a structure like a battery. We're able to do this also with catalysis. This is the example
of a photocatalytic splitting of water. And what we've been able to do is engineer a virus
to basically take dye-absorbing molecules and line them up on the surface of the virus so
it acts as an antenna, and you get an energy transfer across the virus. And then we give
it a second gene to grow an inorganic material that can be used to split water into oxygen
and hydrogen, that can be used for clean fuels. I brought an example of that with me
today. My students promised me it would work. These are virus-assembled nanowires. When
you shine light on them, you can see them bubbling. In this case, you're seeing oxygen
bubbles come out.

Basically, by controlling the genes, you can control multiple materials to improve your
device performance. The last example are solar cells. You can also do this with solar
cells. We've been able to engineer viruses to pick up carbon nanotubes and then grow
titanium dioxide around them, and use it as a way of getting electrons through the device.
And what we've found is through genetic engineering, we can actually increase the
efficiencies of these solar cells to record numbers for these types of dye-sensitized
systems. And I brought one of those as well, that you can play around with outside
afterward. So this is a virus-based solar cell. Through evolution and selection, we took
it from an eight percent efficiency solar cell to an 11 percent efficiency solar cell. So I
hope that I've convinced you that there's a lot of great, interesting things to be learned
about how nature makes materials, and about taking it the next step, to see if you can
force or take advantage of how nature makes materials, to make things that nature hasn't
yet dreamed of making. Thank you.

<!--
ad_duration=3.33
event="TEDxCaltech"
external_start_time=0
intro_duration=11.82
is_subtitle_required="False"
is_talk_featured="True"
language="en"
language_swap="False"
native_language="en"
number_of_related_talks=6
number_of_speakers=1
number_of_subtitled_videos=33
number_of_tags=9
number_of_talk_download_languages=33
number_of_talk_more_resources=0
number_of_talk_recommendations=0
number_of_talks_take_actions=0
post_ad_duration=0.83
published_timestamp="2011-04-27 15:09:00"
recording_date="2011-01-14"
speaker_description="Biological engineer"
speaker_is_published=1
speaker_name="Angela Belcher"
speaker_what_others_say="Belcher has been tackling a whole new field of science every five years"
talk_name="Using nature to grow batteries"
talks_tags=["dna","tedx","alternative-energy","biology","evolution","genetics","nature","virus","science"]
url_audio="https://download.ted.com/talks/AngelaBelcher_2011X.mp3?apikey=acme-roadrunner"
url_photo_speaker="https://pe.tedcdn.com/images/ted/224e216c704e45ba430fde5d0b9ae393b0103654_254x191.jpg"
url_photo_talk="https://s3.amazonaws.com/talkstar-photos/uploads/67f9078c-a3b9-4950-9f4b-0d00e0a38719/AngelaBelcher_2011X-embed.jpg"
url_webpage="https://www.ted.com/talks/angela_belcher_using_nature_to_grow_batteries"
video_type_name="TEDx Talk"
-->