---
title: How repaying loans with social service transforms communities
speaker: Angie Murimirwa
description: >-
 What if you could repay loans through volunteering and mentorship instead of
 money? Activist Angie Murimirwa shares how a game-changing economic tool known as
 "social interest" is reinvigorating sub-Saharan communities once trapped in
 cycles of poverty. Join her as she explains how this approach to lending is
 creating opportunities for thousands of African women and girls -- and shows why
 this model can be replicated anywhere with lasting effects.
date: 2019-12-04
tags: ["economics","social-change","society","women","women-in-business","finance","investment","development","microfinance","business"]
slug: angie_murimirwa_how_repaying_loans_with_social_service_transforms_communities
---

Most of you will know about the challenges faced by my beloved continent, Africa. Too many
people are poor. Millions of girls don't have access to school. And there aren't enough
jobs for the rapidly growing population. Every day, 33,000 new young people join the
search for employment. That's 12 million for three million formal jobs. In sub-Saharan
Africa, less than one in four young people are likely to get waged or salaried work. The
chances of making a secure living are even slimmer for poor and rural young women. They
cannot afford an education. And they do not have the same access to wages, loans or land
as men. This leaves entire communities trapped in a vicious cycle of poverty, inequality
and hopelessness. But I'm not here to narrate the doom and gloom, because we also know that
a youthful population presents an opportunity to kick-start economic growth and solve
global challenges.

And in fact, there is a growing movement in Africa, of educated young women, who are
stepping up and using the power of their network and a tool we call social interest to
uplift communities. I'm one of the leaders of the organization behind this movement. An
organization that also supported me through school. And I have seen social interest
multiply the impact of our work. Social interest is a way to pay back interest on a loan
through service, rather than dollars. Sharing time and knowledge through mentoring,
academic support, business training to others in need. This means the impact of a loan is
felt not by one, but by many. Through this system, we've been able to help and send more
and more girls to school, support them while they are there, help them start businesses
and ultimately, lead in their communities — all while providing funding for the next
generation. Social interest can be used to supercharge any movement where the benefits can
be paid forward. Let me give you an example.

This is Stumai from rural Tanzania. She tragically lost her father when she was just three
years old. Leaving a disabled mother to single-handedly raise her and her five siblings.
Once Stumai completed primary school, she was about to drop out of school and become one
of the 92 percent of girls in sub-Saharan Africa that never finish high school. Instead,
she got lucky. She got support from a nonprofit that paid her fees and kept her in
school. But upon graduating high school, she faced a daunting challenge of what's next. She
knew she had to start her own business to survive. And to help her mother, who had tried
so hard to keep her in school by selling her only assets, a stack of corrugated iron
sheets she had been saving in the hope of building a better home for her children. Stumai
also knew she wouldn’t get a loan from a traditional bank, which generally considers
young, rural women like her, without land or assets, unbankable. Through a special group of
lending partners, she secured 350 dollars to start a food shop, selling vegetables, oil,
rice, tomatoes, onions and beans.

Fellow network members helped to train her on basic business skills, like creating a
business plan, working out profits, marketing, keeping business records and the value of
savings. And the business took off. She repaid the original loan within eight months, and
then borrowed 2,000 dollars to start a motorcycle taxi and courier business. Stumai now
owns two motorcycles and employs two people. And she has been able to purchase land and
build a house, and the business continues to grow from strength to strength. Stumai repaid
her interest in social interest. She paid social interest by providing mentoring to girls
in a local high school. She volunteered weekly as a learner guide, delivering a life
skills and well-being curriculum that helps children gain the confidence to ask questions,
care for and support each other, learn about health and nutrition, set goals and learn how
to achieve them.

Stumai says her greatest reward is witnessing the girls she mentors start to believe in
themselves and succeeding. These days, Stumai also trains other learner guides. That's
multiplying the number of girls making it through school and into secure livelihoods like
she did. Through her business profits, she has been able to support her siblings, three
nieces and nephews and other children in her community to go to school. She also regularly
supports other network members. For example, a young woman studying for a diploma in
community development. In the past two years, Stumai helped her with money for bus fare,
for sanitary pads, for soap and encouraged her to keep going. Stumai spends 370 dollars a
year supporting the education of others. That's 17 percent of her gross earnings from her
motorcycle business. This is the power of social interest. Stumai's example shows that if
you help one girl, not only to go to school, but graduate and start a business, she can in
turn make a giant difference in the lives of others and her community.

Had Stumai paid back interest on her loan in dollars, her success might have been felt by
her and her immediate family, but because she paid interest as social interest, the impact
was felt by her mentees, her nieces, nephews, her employees and so many others around her.
Stumai is just one example of many. Today, we have 7,000 learner guides like Stumai,
working across Malawi, Tanzania, Ghana, Zambia and Zimbabwe. And collectively, they've
helped children do better in school. The girls we work with are nearly three times less
likely to drop out of school, because learner guides make home visits when girls fail to
attend school to help them back on track. They also work with communities and district
governments to address the challenges children face, including preventing or annulling
child marriages, connecting children facing hunger or hardship at home with local support,
or running study groups so that children who might be lagging behind in their studies can
get supporters and catch up.

They act as trusted sisters, friends and guardians. So far, nearly 6,300 network members
have borrowed close to three million dollars, with a repayment rate of those loans at
consistently above 95 percent. And our 140,000 members, they have invested their own
resources to support and send over 937,000 children to primary and secondary school. Every
young woman we work with supports, on average, another three children outside of her
immediate family to go to school. All without additional money from us. We are building a
powerful force. Gaining ever greater momentum as we open the door for more and more girls
to go to school, succeed, lead and in turn, support thousands more. This system,
supporting those once excluded to transform their lives and then step up for others, can
work for more than girls' education. Of course, you need to get your money back if you
lend it. But instead of demanding interest in dollars, can you consider using social
interest instead? For example, could young people pass on the skills they learned in
training colleges?

Like Michelle, who teaches brickmaking in rural Zimbabwe. Or Louisa, who is training
others on climate-smart agriculture in Malawi. Or Fatima in Ghana, who is training women
to help deliver babies where expectant mothers might not be able to make it to the local
hospital on time. When I was growing up, an elder in my village in rural Zimbabwe once
described the challenges I faced in going to school. She said, "Those who harvest many
pumpkins often do not have the clay pots to cook them in."

What she meant was that, although I got the best possible results in my exams when I
finished elementary school, my talent was of no value if my family could not afford to pay
for me to continue my education. Well, with this system, we are not just providing pots,
or making a single meal out of the pumpkins. After all, there are hundreds of seeds in a
single pumpkin. We are saving the seeds, planting them and nurturing every one of them.
And the result? A virtual cycle of prosperity, equality and hope, led by young women.
Because together, we are shaking up the world. Pamoja tunaweza — that's Swahili for my
network motto: "Together we can!"Thank you.

<!--
ad_duration=3.33
comment_count=4
event="TEDWomen 2019"
external_duration=0
external_start_time=0
has_talk_citation=1
intro_duration=11.82
is_subtitle_required="False"
is_talk_featured="True"
language="en"
language_swap="False"
native_language="en"
number_of_related_talks=6
number_of_speakers=1
number_of_subtitled_videos=14
number_of_tags=10
number_of_talk_download_languages=15
number_of_talk_more_resources=0
number_of_talk_recommendations=1
number_of_talks_take_actions=2
post_ad_duration=0.83
published_timestamp="2020-03-19 14:48:40"
recording_date="2019-12-04"
speaker_description="Education activist"
speaker_is_published=1
speaker_name="Angie Murimirwa"
talk_more_resources=[]
talk_name="How repaying loans with social service transforms communities"
talk_recommendations_blurb="More resources curated by Angie Murimirwa"
talks_tags=["economics","social-change","society","women","women-in-business","finance","investment","development","microfinance","business"]
url_audio="https://download.ted.com/talks/AngieMurimirwa_2019W.mp3?apikey=acme-roadrunner"
url_photo_speaker="https://pe.tedcdn.com/images/ted/df6386457c5cfefa040efbc95ec843f95da60bf5_254x191.jpg"
url_photo_talk="https://s3.amazonaws.com/talkstar-photos/uploads/5675832f-61d4-4182-8e14-eaad65b0ee30/AngieMurimirwa_2019W-embed.jpg"
url_webpage="https://www.ted.com/talks/angie_murimirwa_how_repaying_loans_with_social_service_transforms_communities"
video_type_name="TED Stage Talk"
-->