---
title: Fashion that celebrates all body types -- boldly and unapologetically
speaker: Becca McCharen-Tran
description: >-
 Fashion designers have the power to change culture -- and Becca McCharen-Tran is
 using her platform to expand the industry's narrow definition of beauty. Sharing
 highlights of her work, McCharen-Tran discusses the inspiration behind her
 norm-shattering designs and shows how she's celebrating beauty in all forms. "I
 want the consumer to know that it's not your body that needs to change -- it's
 the clothes," she says.
date: 2019-06-27
tags: ["fashion","design","social-change","art","gender","inclusion","human-body","identity"]
slug: becca_mccharen_tran_fashion_that_celebrates_all_body_types_boldly_and_unapologetically
---

As fashion designers, our decisions have the power to change our culture. We choose who is
cast in our runway shows and campaigns, and ultimately, who is celebrated and considered
beautiful, and who is not. Having this platform is a responsibility. One that can be
utilized to exclude people or to empower others. Growing up, I was obsessed with fashion. I
pored over all different types of fashion magazines at my local Barnes and Noble. To be
fashionable was to be tall, skinny, with long, shiny hair. That's what I saw as the ideal,
and it was reinforced everywhere I looked. And to be honest, it still is. I wanted to be
like the models, so I stopped eating. It was a dark time in my life; my eating disorder
consumed me. All I could think about was counting every single calorie, and waking up
early before school every day so I could run a few miles. It took me years to finally
release the grip that the eating disorder had over my life.

But when it did, it freed up so much brain space to think about what I was truly
passionate about. For so long, the fashion industry has worked hard to set an ideal of
beauty that celebrates thin, young, white, cisgender, able-bodied models as the ideal.
It's impossible not to be bombarded with images of models that have been photoshopped to
where there's not a single pore, fat roll or stretch mark in sight. You don't need to look
hard to find examples. This definition of beauty is damaging, dangerous and destructive,
and we need to explode it immediately.

I'm glad you agree.

One of the worst things I've realized over the years is that my experience with disordered
eating is not an anomaly. In fact, it's par for the course. I think there's a study that
says 91 percent of women, and likely those of all gender identities, are unhappy with the
way they look. It's unforgivable that we live in a society where it's normal or expected
for teenagers to grow up hating themselves. We've been fighting for fat acceptance and
women's body autonomy since the '60s. And there has been headway. We have plus-size models
like Ashley Graham and musicians with body-positive messages, like Lizzo, breaking into
the mainstream. Thank God.

There's brands like Area that have released campaigns without any Photoshop retouching.
But we're still inundated with unrealistic expectations. I love this quote by Lizzo, who
said, "Body positivity only exists because body negativity is the norm."So how do we
change the stigma around looking different or not fitting into this narrow definition of
beauty? I believe it's by celebrating beauty in all different forms, bold and
unapologetically. But many fashion designers continue to reinforce this narrow definition
of beauty. From the way they are taught in school and into the real world, they drape on
mannequins that are only size four, or sketch on bodies that are super stretched out and
not anatomically proportioned. Different-size bodies aren't taken into account during the
design process. They're not thought of. So who are these designers designing for? But the
conversation around exclusivity in fashion doesn't begin and end with size.

It's about seeing people of all different gender expressions, different ability levels,
different ages, different races and ethnicities, celebrated for their own unique beauty.
In my own work as a fashion designer, I started a brand called Chromat, and we're
committed to empowering women, femmes and nonbinary #ChromatBABES, of all shapes and
sizes, through perfectly fit garments for every body. Swimwear has become a huge focus for
me, because of the power that this single garment can have over the way people feel about
themselves. We wanted to take our focus on celebrating all body types to a garment that's
fraught with insecurity. On our runways, you see curves, cellulite and scars worn proudly.
We're a runway show, yes, but we're also a celebration. I didn't start designing 10 years
ago with the mission to change the entire industry. But the models we cast at the time,
who just happened to be my friends who had begged to be in my shows, were so radical to
some people, and, unfortunately, still are different or strange to some, that it became a
huge part of what we're known for. However, inclusivity means nothing if it's only surface
level.

Behind the scenes, from the photographer, to the casting director, to the interns, who is
making the decisions behind the scenes is just as important. It's imperative to include
diverse decision-makers in the process, and it's always better to collaborate with
different communities, rather than trying to speak for them. And this is an important
piece of the puzzle that many young designers may not think about when they're first
starting their careers, but hiring a plus-size or a transgender photographer, or a woman
of color as your casting director, or a black makeup artist — hey, Fatima Thomas — who
intimately understands how important it is to be able to work with all skin tones: it's
essential to creating a holistically inclusive output, like this one. As a fashion
designers that do a lot of swim, we wanted to rewrite the rules around having a bikini
body. So we cast a team of babe guards to enforce guidelines around inclusion and
acceptance at the pool.

Instead of "no diving" and "no running," how about "celebrate cellulite," "body policing
prohibited," and "intolerance not tolerated." And this was enforced by babe guards Mama
Cax, Denise Bidot, Geena Rocero, Ericka Hart and Emme, all activists in their own
right. I've always felt it was important to show a range of different bodies in our runway
shows and campaigns. But it actually wasn't until recently that we were able to expand our
size range in a major way. We first launched our curve collection five years ago; we were
so excited. But when it launched, it fell flat. Nobody was interested. None of our
department stores stocked above a size large, and if they did, it was somewhere else in
the building entirely. In fact, one time our sales team said, "You know, it's so cool you
have trans models and curve models on the runway — I love what you're doing. But when the
buyers come in to see the collection for market, they want to be sold a dream, they want
to see something that they aspire to be." Implying that our models weren't that. But I've
realized it's so much more important to open up this dream to more people.

I want the consumer to know that it's not your body that needs to change — it's the
clothes.

There needs to be more fashion options at all sizes and in all retailers. So finally, in
2018, Nordstrom actually placed an order up to 3X. And this was a huge game changer for us
to have a major retailer invest in adding these units, so we could go to the factory — now
we go up to 4X, which is about a size 32. Having that investment helped us to change and
realign our entire design process. We now have different-sized bodies to sketch and drape
on in the studio. And if more fashion schools taught these skills, more designers would
have the ability to design for all bodies.

So as fashion designers, it's our job to utilize our platform to explode this narrow and
restrictive definition of beauty. My goal is that one day, teenagers growing up don't feel
the same pressure that I did to conform. And I hope that our work contributes to the
fashion industry's opening up to celebrate many different identities. Thank you.(Applause
and cheers)

<!--
ad_duration=3.33
comment_count=30
event="TED Salon The Macallan"
external_start_time=0
has_talk_citation=1
intro_duration=11.82
is_subtitle_required="False"
is_talk_featured="True"
language="en"
language_swap="False"
native_language="en"
number_of_related_talks=6
number_of_speakers=1
number_of_subtitled_videos=20
number_of_tags=8
number_of_talk_download_languages=20
number_of_talk_more_resources=0
number_of_talk_recommendations=1
number_of_talks_take_actions=3
post_ad_duration=0.83
published_timestamp="2019-10-22 14:49:19"
recording_date="2019-06-27"
speaker_description="Fashion designer"
speaker_is_published=1
speaker_name="Becca McCharen-Tran"
talk_more_resources=[]
talk_name="Fashion that celebrates all body types -- boldly and unapologetically"
talk_recommendations_blurb="More resources curated by Becca McCharen-Tran"
talks_tags=["fashion","design","social-change","art","gender","inclusion","human-body","identity"]
url_audio="https://download.ted.com/talks/BeccaMcCharenTran_2019S.mp3?apikey=acme-roadrunner"
url_photo_speaker="https://pe.tedcdn.com/images/ted/c22991742639eab4fb9d9725f91b472658cb105c_254x191.jpg"
url_photo_talk="https://s3.amazonaws.com/talkstar-photos/uploads/9778f588-bb29-46d4-9a43-e1267c65fd50/BeccaMcCharen-Tran_2019S-embed.jpg"
url_webpage="https://www.ted.com/talks/becca_mccharen_tran_fashion_that_celebrates_all_body_types_boldly_and_unapologetically"
video_type_name="TED Salon Talk (partner)"
-->