---
title: How we must respond to the coronavirus pandemic
speaker: Bill Gates
description: >-
 Philanthropist and Microsoft cofounder Bill Gates offers insights into the
 COVID-19 pandemic, discussing why testing and self-isolation are essential, which
 medical advancements show promise and what it will take for the world to endure
 this crisis. (This virtual conversation is part of the TED Connects series,
 hosted by head of TED Chris Anderson and current affairs curator Whitney
 Pennington Rodgers. Recorded March 24, 2020)
date: 2020-03-24
tags: ["health-care","disease","virus","medicine","global-issues","economics","pandemic","ted-connects","coronavirus"]
slug: bill_gates_how_we_must_respond_to_the_coronavirus_pandemic
---

Whitney Pennington Rodgers: Hello and welcome to everyone joining us from around the
globe. Thank you for being part of day two of our special series TED Connects. This week,
we're bringing you interviews from some of the world's greatest minds to offer tools for
us to navigate through and thrive in these really uncertain times. I'm Whitney Pennington
Rogers, TED's current affairs curator, and I'll be one of your hosts for today's
event. Yesterday, we kicked off this series with an interview from acclaimed psychologist
Susan David, who offered us some tips on how to really be our best selves in these trying
times. And we're going to switch gears a little bit today from thinking about our own
personal mental health to the state of our global public health systems. Chris Anderson:
Thank you. I guess we have a pretty exciting guest to introduce. On the other side of the
country, let's bring in Bill Gates. Bill, they say the better-known people are, the less
you have to intro them.

It's great to have you here. How are you doing? Bill Gates: I think this is an
unprecedented, really disconcerting time for everyone, with things being shut down, not
knowing exactly how long it's going to last, worrying about the health of all the people
we care about. You know, I'm lucky that I get to connect up with video conferencing using
Teams a lot, so the Foundation is stepping up and there's a lot of great people trying to
help with this crisis. But it's scary for everyone. CA: Are you basically stuck at home
like many of us watching? BG: Yeah, almost all my meetings are using Teams now, I'm getting
used to that. You know, I've gone days without seeing any coworkers. CA: Let's start here,
Bill. Five years ago, you stood on the TED stage and you gave this chilling warning that
the world was in danger, at some point, of a major pandemic. People watching that talk
now, their hair stands up on the back of their neck — it is exactly what we're living
through.

What happened, did people listen to that warning at all? BG: Basically, no. You know, I was
hopeful that with the Zika and Ebola and SARS and MERS, they all reminded us that,
particularly in a world where people move around so much, you can get huge devastation.
And so the talk was to say, hey, we're not ready for the next pandemic, but in fact,
there's advances in science that if we put resources against them, we can be ready. Sadly,
very little was done. There were some things — the Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness
Innovation, CEPI, was funded by our foundation, Wellcome Trust and a number of
governments, to do some of the platform vaccine work, but in the area of diagnostics,
antibodies, antivirals, basically doing the disease games that I talked about, where we'd
simulate what needed to be done. We hardly did anything, and so now here we have a
respiratory virus that is, sadly, fulfilling some of the more negative predictions I
made. CA: Last month, you said that this might be the big one.

You wrote that this could be the sort of once-in-a-century pandemic that people had been
fearing. Is that how you think of it still? BG: Well, it's awful to say this, but we could
have a respiratory virus whose case fatality rate was even higher, if this was something
like smallpox, you know, that kills 30 percent of people. So this is horrific. But in
fact, most people, even who get the COVID disease, are able to survive. So it's quite
infectious, way more infectious than MERS or SARS were. It's not as fatal as they were.
And yet, the disruption we're seeing, in order to knock it down, is really completely
unprecedented. So this is going global, that was — it's respiratory, that was the great
fear. How many people end up dying — hopefully, if we do the right things, it won't be a
gigantic number. So, you know, we should end up not having the 1918 flu situation. We
should be able to do a lot better than that. CA: And that's because of actions that we
would take.

I mean, left without the right actions, the prospects are pretty deadly. If we knew what
we knew in 1919, this thing could take out tens of millions of people around the world.
You said — is the key thing here that it's got this sort of a strange combination of being
certainly more dangerous than flu — not as dangerous as something like Ebola or SARS, but
more dangerous than flu by a factor, but infectious, and also infectious before symptoms
have started, is that part of why it's been really hard to respond to? BG: Right. Ebola,
you're actually flat on your back before you're very infectious. So you're not at church
or in a bus or at a store. With most respiratory viruses like the flu and COVID, at first
you only feel a little bit of a fever and a little bit sick, and so there's the
possibility you're going about your normal activities and infecting other people. And so
human-to-human transmissible respiratory viruses that in the early stage aren't stopping
you from doing things, that's kind of a worst case, and that's where, you know, I did a
flu simulation in the 2015 talk and showed how quickly it spread.

You know, versus 1918, people move around a lot more now than they used to, and so that
works against us. Now the medical system that steps up to treat people is also far, far
better. CA: But when was it clear to you that unless we acted, this could be a really
deadly pandemic? BG: Well, in January it was discussed that there was human-to-human
transmission taking place. And so the alarm bells were ringing that this fits the very
scary pattern that it will be very difficult to contain. And on January 23, China did
their equivalent of the shutdown. Did it in a fairly extreme form. The very good news is
that they were able to reduce the infection rates dramatically because of those actions.
But it's January where everybody should have been on notice — let's get our act together
with testing, let's get going on therapeutics and vaccines, we've got to get organized
because we have this novel respiratory virus whose infectiousness and fatality put it in
that superscary range. CA: And so, what did happen?

Because it's such a mystery to me about the "lost month" of preparations in many countries
and certainly in the US, where we are. Were you on the phone to people during early
February, late January, early February, saying, "Guys, what's going on, this is a really
big deal, what are we doing?" What was happening behind the scenes during that period? BG:
Well, you'd like to have government money show up for the key activities. We put out 100
million, we created the Therapeutics Accelerator, there's the period between when we
realized it was transmitting and now, where we should have done more. I think the most
important thing to discuss today is that in the area of testing, we're still not creating
that capacity and applying it to the people most in need. And so we have health workers
who are symptomatic, who can't get a test and so they don't know should they go in or not
go in, and yet we have lots of tests being given to people who aren't symptomatic.

So the testing thing to me, it's got to be organized, it's got to be prioritized, that is
super, super urgent. The second thing is the isolation that, you know, various parts, just
focusing on the US, some parts are doing that in a fairly strong way and other parts not
yet, and it's very hard to do, it's tough on people, it's disastrous for the economy. But
the sooner you do it in a tough way, the sooner you can undo it and go back to normal. CA:
So we'll come to the isolation part in a minute, but just sticking with the testing thing,
I'm just so confused as to why, with more than a month's notice — I mean, there are so
many smart epidemiologists in the US, for example, you plug numbers about infectiousness
and fatality into any simulation and you see that if you don't do anything, millions of
people will die. And there's a month. So what's your explanation, what do you think
happened here as to why there was almost no — a month later, there was no viable test in
the US.

Was this just government complexity, too many chefs in the kitchen, what on earth happened
here? BG: Well, we certainly didn't take advantage of the month of February. The good news
is that the actual process, the PCR machines, we have a lot in the United States. And so
there's models like South Korea, who took advantage of February, built up the testing
capacity, and they were able to contact-trace and their infections have gone down, even
without the type of shutdown that, because we're late, we're having to do. One thing that
is good news just this week is that people had thought to do this test, that you had to
have a nurse or doctor shove a swab way up, all the way to the back of your throat, which
hurts a lot, but also, you're going to cough and potentially spread the disease to that
health care worker. So they have to have protective equipment and change that. We sent
data to the FDA this weekend, showing that just an individual, by themselves, swabbing up
to the tip of their nose, the accuracy of that test is essentially the same as having a
health care worker do it.

That helps a lot. We still have to do other things, but that means that you don't have to
change protective equipment, you just hand the patient that swab, they do it, put it in
the test tube, and if the capacity is right, within 24 hours, you should get that result
back. CA: So how do you see that playing out? Are there people going to massively scale
those tests and how will ordinary citizens be able to get hold of them? Does it still have
to be kind of prescribed by a doctor at some point, or at some point, will you be able to
order them off Amazon or something? BG: Well, it's pretty chaotic today, because the
government hasn't stepped in to make sure the testing capacity is both increased and it's
used for the right cases. There will be a website — and if the federal government doesn't
do it, a lot of local governments will have to do it — that you go to, you give your
situation, including your symptoms, you're told, based on your work and your symptoms, are
you a priority.

If so, you're told where there are kiosks you can go to and you'll do the self-swab and
just hand it over, or eventually, we'll send the kits to you at home, and then you'll send
it back and hear that result. Maybe six months from now, you'll actually have a strip
where you perform the test in the home, but for now, they're sending it back for the PCR
processing. We can have massive capacity there. And that's how you know. The testing is
everything, because that's how you know whether you need to do more shutdown or you're
starting to get to the point where you can relieve it. CA: Some people are trying to argue
now that, almost, the testing should be dialed back, because the cat is out of the bag,
testing is bringing people together and risking infection, you know, forget that, let's
just focus on treatment and on isolation strategies. You disagree with that. Testing is
still absolutely essential and needs to be scaled dramatically. BG: The two that go
together are testing, at very high volume, and the isolation piece.

If you're a medical worker, you want to stay and do your job. If you're making sure the
electricity, water, food is still available, you want to do your job, and so testing is
what indicates to you, do you need to go into isolation and make sure you're not the
source of spread. And so, you know, testing is the key thing. South Korea did that in this
massive way that everybody should learn from. And so that is paired with the isolation
piece. Our goal here is to get to the point where a very small percentage of the
population is infected. You know, China, only 0.01 percent of the population was infected.
If you let it, if you don't do these things, you're going to get the majority of people
infected and that huge overload of the medical system. CA: Whitney has some questions from
our online audience. Whitney. WPR: Some of the questions that we're seeing are about how
our tech giants and leaders can play a role in isolating this and containing this
virus. BG: The tech companies are very involved in making sure that some work can go
on.

People can stay in touch, you know, they can help with some of the disease modeling, they
can help with the visibility of the numbers. It's actually very impressive, you get up
there and you can see those numbers. Actually, they're sad numbers, but everybody's able
to monitor this thing. Back in 1918, they didn't have this type of visibility, and ability
to share best practices. But for a lot of people, the isolation is the key thing. CA: Bill,
one of the riddles about this isolation strategy is how long it has to last. A lot of
people are concerned that the price of victory by isolating everyone is that you crash the
economy, and that we have to be, basically, at home, not doing our regular jobs for three,
six months, maybe all year. And so much so that there's now this big debate in the US and
other countries about this may just be the wrong strategy, that we can't crash the economy
that badly, we should only isolate for another couple of weeks, and then let people back,
and if that means a lot of other people get sick and we eventually build up herd immunity,
that may be the right way to go.

What's your thought on this, what is the isolation strategy that eventually leads to us
getting back to normal? BG: It's very tough to say to people, "Hey, keep going to
restaurants," you know, "Go buy new houses, ignore that pile of bodies over in the corner,
just, you know, we want you to keep spending," because there's some, maybe a politician
who thinks GDP growth is what really counts. It's very hard to tell people, when there's
an epidemic spreading that threatens, particularly, their parents or elderly people that
they know, that they should go about things knowing that their activity is spreading this
disease. I don't know of any rich countries that have chosen to use that approach. It is
true, if you did that approach, over a period of several years, enough people would be
infected you'd have what's called herd immunity. But herd immunity is meaningless until
you infect over half the population.

And so you can take — You'll overload your medical system, so your case fatality rate,
instead of being one percent, will be like three, four percent. And so, the idea, it's
very irresponsible for somebody to suggest we can have the best of both worlds. What we
need is the extreme shutdown so that in six to ten weeks, if things go well, then you can
start opening back up. CA: So just putting the math together from what you just said, Bill,
to get to herd immunity, you need more than half the people in the country to basically
get the bug. So in the case of the US, for example, that would be 150 million people,
thereabouts. You said that the fatality rate in that scenario, you're talking about four
to five million people potential fatalities. That is just a horrifying scenario that no
one should be contemplating. BG: Even one percent of the population getting sick, they will
treat, whoever goes for this "ignore the disease" strategy, they will treat them as a
pariah state, so none of their people will go in, and none of your people will go into
that.

And so briefly, a few countries in Europe that hadn't really looked at this hard,
considered, "OK, should we be the ones who kind of go about business as usual?" It is
tempting, because if you got there early — South Korea did not have to do the extreme
shutdown, because they did such a good job on testing. CA: Testing and containment. BG:
That's why it's so maddening to me that government is not allocating the testing to where
it's needed, and maybe that will have to happen at the state level, because it's not
happening at the federal level. But there is no middle course on this thing. It is sad
that the shutdown will be harder for poorer countries than it is for richer countries. CA:
So let's come into that in minute. The one exception I've heard the case made for is
Japan, that Japan has not contained it quite in the same way that South Korea did but has
allowed people to work. It's tried to make extreme measures for protecting their most
elderly population.

But they've tried to find a middle scenario, haven't they? BG: If you act — When you have
hundreds of cases, you may be able to contain it by doing great testing and great contact
tracing, and restricting foreigners coming in, without as much damage to your economy. The
US is past this opportunity to control without shutdown. So the worst case of what was
happening in Wuhan in the beginning or in northern Italy over the last few weeks, that we
avoid that. But we did not act fast enough to have an ability to avoid the shutdown. CA:
But then what I don't understand, in the case of the US, for example, is that even if
we're successful in bending the curve and reducing the number of new cases from a period
of extreme shutdown, as it were, no immunity has been built up. Let's say that there's
still no vaccine. Surely when you lift restrictions and people start going back to work,
the whole thing just blows up again. BG: The experience that we're seeing in China and in
South Korea is that there are not these people who are asymptomatic that are causing lots
of infections.

And that's a parameter that, as you build the model, you have to put in. There's an
Imperial model that people talk about a lot, which shows that reopening is very hard to
do. But the results of that model are not matching what we see in China, and so very
likely, there aren't as many of these infecting asymptomatics. And that's why you have to
be pragmatic. There's a lot we don't know. For example, seasonality may help us in the
Northern Hemisphere, the force of infection will — Respiratory viruses, to some degree,
they all are seasonal. We don't know how seasonal this one is, but you know, there's a
reasonable chance that the force of infection will be going down. And it's your testing
that always is telling you, "Oh, my gosh, do I have to shut down more, or can I start to
open up?" So particularly, right as you open up, that testing and contact tracing is
saying to you — And you can say I'm more on the optimistic side, that it will be possible
to do what China's doing, where they are starting to go back to normal. CA: And help me
understand what happened there because it seems kind of miraculous to me, because this
virus was exploding, yes, in Wuhan, but people moved from there to many other parts of
China.

How is it possible that the combination of the shutdown in Wuhan and measures elsewhere
seem to have got to the point where there are literally no new cases happening. I mean, to
me, that implies that literally, the virus is not circulating at all between humans in
China. You know, there's a few tourists coming in who they deal with, but I mean, is that
literally your interpretation of what happened, that it's no longer circulating in
China? BG: Absolutely. Take a spreadsheet and take a number like four — one person infects
four people — and say the cycle is every 10 days. Go through eight of those cycles, and
you're getting the big number. You know, start with 10,000 and then, you know, that
increase. If you take the number 0.4 instead, that is, the average case infects 0.4
people, then look at what happens to that number as you go out. It drops to zero, and so
things that are exponential are very, very dramatic. When they're above one, they are
growing rapidly.

When they're below one, they are shrinking rapidly. And so the isolation in China drove
that reproductive number to well below zero. And so local infection rates —CA: Below
one. BG: Below one, sorry. And that quarantine, you know, quarantine comes from "40 days,"
which is what they thought would help for black plague, that is our primary technique.
Thank God we have testing, if we use it properly. We are doing therapeutics, which will
help with the death rate, but in terms of keeping the infections below one percent of the
population, it really all depends just on the two things: isolation and testing. CA: So to
quote a question from my Twitter feed this morning for you Bill: If you were president for
a month in the US, what would be the top two or three things you would do? BG: Well, the
clear message that we have no choice to maintain this isolation and that's going to keep
going for a period of time, you know, probably in the Chinese case, it was like six weeks,
so we have to prepare ourselves for that, and do it very well.

And then use the testing and every week, talk about what's going on with that. If you're
doing isolation well, within about 20 days, you'll see those numbers really change, you
know, instead of this, you'll see this, and that is a sign that you're on your way. Now,
you have to stay to get more generations that are 0.4 infections per previous infection.
You have to maintain it for a number of weeks there. And you know, so this is not going to
be easy. We need a clear message about that. It is really tragic that the economic effects
of this are very dramatic. I mean, nothing like this has ever happened to the economy in
our lifetimes. But bringing the economy back and doing money, that's more of a reversible
thing than bringing people back to life. And so, we're going to take the pain in the
economic dimension, huge pain, in order to minimize the pain in the disease and death
dimension. CA: Whitney. WPR: We have a lot of other questions coming in.

One that we've been seeing is a question about what tools are available for countries that
maybe don't have the luxury of being able to social-distance, don't have great health
systems in place, how should they be handling this virus? BG: Yeah, I would say, if the
rich countries really do their job well, by the summer, they'll be like China is, or some
of the other countries that responded early. But in the developing countries, particularly
in the Southern Hemisphere, the seasonality is large. As you say, the ability to isolate,
you know, when you go out to get your food every day, you have to earn your wage, when you
live in a slum or you're very nearby each other, it's very hard to do, as you move down
the income ladder, than it is for a country like the United States. And so we should all
accelerate the vaccine, which eventually will come, and you know, people are being
responsible to say that that's going to take 18 months. And there's a lot of those being
pursued.

I'm talking a lot with Seth Berkley, who you're going to have later this week, who can
talk a lot about the vaccine front, because he's definitely at the center of that, being
the head of GAVI. We do need to get really cheap testing out to these countries, and we
need to get therapeutics so you don't need to put five percent of people on respirators.
Because even if they had the equipment, they don't have the personnel, they just don't
have the beds, the capacity. And so the only good news is that the rich countries have
this and so they will be learning about testing, therapeutics, and funding the vaccines
for the entire world, to try and minimize the damage in developing countries. WPR: Great,
I'll be back later with more questions. CA: Bill, you mentioned therapeutics there. What is
looking promising, is anything looking promising? BG: Yeah, so there's quite a range of
things going on. There's a few that get mentioned a lot, remdesivir, hydroxychloroquine,
azithromycin, and the data is still a bit confusing, but there's some positive data on
those.

Remdesivir is a five-day IV infusion, and actually kind of hard to manufacture, so people
are looking at how that can be improved. The hydroxychloroquine looks like it works,
somewhat, if you get in early. There's a huge list of compounds, including antibodies,
antiviral drugs, and so the Gates Foundation and Wellcome Trust, with support from
Mastercard and now others, created this therapeutics accelerator to really triage out. You
have hundreds of people showing up and saying, try this, try that. So we look at lab
assays, animal models, and so we understand which things should be prioritized for these
very quick human trials that need to be done all over the world. So the coordination on
that is very complex, globally. But I think, you know, out of the top 20 or so candidates,
probably three or four of them will work out, you know, at different stages of the
disease, to reduce the respiratory distress. CA: I heard you mentioned that one possibility
might be treatments from the serum, the blood serum, of people who had had the disease and
recovered.

So I guess they're carrying antibodies. Talk a bit about that, how that could work and
what it would take to accelerate that. BG: Yeah, this has always been discussed as how
could you pull that off. So people who are recovered, it appears, have really effective
antibodies in their blood. So you could go, transfuse them and only take out the white
cells, the immune cells. And then the question is, OK, how many patients' worth of
material could you get? You know, if you have that recovered person come in, say, once a
week, do you get enough for two people or five people? Then logistically, you have to take
that and get it to where that need is. And so it's fairly complicated, you know, compared
to a drug that we can make in high volume. You know, the cost of taking it out and putting
it back in probably doesn't scale as well. But there is work being done on this. You know,
we actually started with Ebola, and fortunately, it got done before it was
needed.

So that is being pursued and it will work to some degree, but it will be hard to scale the
numbers. CA: So it's almost like, when you talk about the need to accelerate testing, the
immediate need is for testing for the virus. But is it possible that in a few months'
time, there's going to be this growing need to test for these antibodies in people, i.e.
to see if someone had the disease and recovered, maybe they didn't even know they had it.
Because you could picture this growing worldwide force of heroes — let's call them heroes
— who have been through this experience and have a lot to offer the world. Maybe they can
offer blood donation, serum donation. But also other tasks, like, if you've got
overwhelmed health care systems, presumably, there are kind of community health worker
type tasks that people could be trained to do to relieve the pressure there, if we knew
that they were effectively immune? BG: Yes.

Until we came up with the self-swab and showed FDA that that's equivalent, we were
thinking that people who might be able to man those kiosks would be the recovered
patients. Now we don't want to have a lot of recovered people, you know. To be clear,
we're trying, through the shutdown, in the United States, to not get to one percent of the
population infected. We're well below that today, but with exponentiation, you could get
past that three million. I believe we will be able to avoid that with having this economic
pain. Eventually, what we'll have to have is certificates of who is a recovered person,
who is a vaccinated person, because you don't want people moving around the world — where
you'll have some countries that won't have it under control, sadly — you don't want to
completely block off the ability for those people to go there and come back and move
around. CA: Bill, is your foundation helping to accelerate the manufacture of these self
tests?

What are the prospects for really seeing scale on some of this testing soon, not just in
the US, but globally? BG: Yeah, our foundation, we'd been funding the thing called the Flu
Study to really understand how respiratory viruses spread. It's amazing how little was
understood about how important schools are, different age groups, different types of
interaction. And that gave us an experience. In fact, that flu study actually was the
first time coronavirus was found in the community, because the government was still saying
you only test people who'd come from China, but we ran into people who had coronavirus,
who hadn't been travelers. So, that was like an early warning sign, even though the
regulation said you weren't supposed to even look at that. So yeah, the Foundation is
working with all the private sector people, the diagnostics people on this testing piece.
Now that we can do the self-swab, those swabs are very easy to manufacture.

The one where you had to jam it into the throat, deep turbinate, that was getting into
short supply. So the swab should not be limiting, neither should the various chemicals
that help run the PCR machines. So we should be able to get to a South Korea-type
prioritized testing thing within a few weeks. CA: How important is it that the world's
nations collaborate right now? I mean, it seems like, you know, here's this common enemy
facing humanity, it does not know that it just crossed a border, it does not know what
race people are, what religion they are — it just knows, "Here's a human, I've got a
manufacturing machine here that can make me famous." And it goes to work. It's so
terrifying to me to see signs of countries starting to blame each other or the xenophobia,
it just seems so toxic. What's your take on this, Bill? Do you see signs of cooperation
happening, or are you also worried about the sort of, "US versus China" kind of thing that
seems to be going on if we're not careful? BG: Well, I see both.

I see that countries that are recovered can help other countries. And that's fantastic. If
by the summer, we've knocked this thing down, then great, we can help other countries.
There are vaccine projects all over the world, and those should be evaluated on a very
neutral basis, to which one is the best to help humanity. And make sure the manufacturing
capacity isn't just for rich countries, that it's scaled up, very low cost stuff for the
entire world, and that's the spirit of GAVI, is getting vaccines out to every person. So
in the science side, and data-sharing side, you see this great cooperation going on.
Unfortunately, whenever you have disease, this sense of other and foreign and "Oh, stay
away from me," you know, that sort of pulling inward is reinforced. And we have to avoid
that. You know, ironically, we have to isolate physically, while in terms of looking at
community groups that are pooling resources to help make sure food gets to everyone and
help assure medical care, you know, if older people need to be moved out of common
facilities, you help out with that, and that people aren't suffering too much from the
psychology of isolation.

So our generosity has to go up towards others at the same time we're less actually
physically interacting with other people. CA: I mean, thinking about the situation in many
developing countries, I'm curious how you think of this. You mentioned, first of all, that
seasonality may help, i.e. high temperatures. Is it possible that that is so far
protecting, to some extent, places like India or sub-Saharan Africa and so forth? BG:
India's Northern Hemisphere. So Southern Hemisphere is lots of Africa, South America,
Australia, New Zealand, Indonesia. And it is true, either the force of the infection is
lower there or we're just not seeing it with testing. You know, a few months from now,
we'll understand the seasonality question, which would be good news for the Northern
Hemisphere, and somewhat bad news for the Southern Hemisphere. Now more people live in the
Northern Hemisphere, including India, Pakistan, and that would buy us some time, and time
is a big deal, because all these tools get so much better if you had to go into a second
season with it.

But yeah, sadly, we could see, in the next few months, as the Southern Hemisphere is
moving into its fall and then winter, we could see a big increase there, and that is going
to be very difficult. Now they don't have as many older people, but they have lots of
people who are HIV positive, or have malnutrition or various lung challenges because of
indoor smoke, and so the wild card is how well can the developing countries deal with
this. CA: If you're in a country where the majority of your population is making less than
two or three dollars a day, can you even afford a strategy that looks like, basically,
shutting down the economy? BG: I'm very worried that there will be a massive number of
deaths in those poorer countries, because the health systems just aren't — you know, the
number of respirators, hospitals, and of course, when you overload that system, your
deaths are not just COVID deaths, but everyone else who's trying to access a system that
will be somewhat in chaos, including with health workers who are getting sick. CA:
OK

<!--
ad_duration=3.33
event="TED Connects"
external_duration=0
external_start_time=0
has_talk_citation=1
intro_duration=11.82
is_subtitle_required="False"
is_talk_featured="True"
language="en"
language_swap="False"
native_language="en"
number_of_related_talks=6
number_of_speakers=3
number_of_subtitled_videos=1
number_of_tags=9
number_of_talk_download_languages=1
number_of_talk_more_resources=1
number_of_talk_recommendations=0
number_of_talks_take_actions=2
post_ad_duration=0.83
published_timestamp="2020-03-25 15:17:52"
recording_date="2020-03-24"
speaker_description="Technologist, philanthropist"
speaker_is_published=1
speaker_name="Bill Gates"
talk_name="How we must respond to the coronavirus pandemic"
talks_tags=["health-care","disease","virus","medicine","global-issues","economics","pandemic","ted-connects","coronavirus"]
url_audio="https://download.ted.com/talks/BillGates_2020S.mp3?apikey=acme-roadrunner"
url_photo_speaker="https://pe.tedcdn.com/images/ted/1d1b89d8a6ce5dfa5a8b8adc5486d0f97e066029_254x191.jpg"
url_photo_talk="https://s3.amazonaws.com/talkstar-photos/uploads/bba39c49-f300-42fb-9d96-23178643d276/BillGates_2020V-embed.jpg"
url_webpage="https://www.ted.com/talks/bill_gates_how_we_must_respond_to_the_coronavirus_pandemic"
video_type_name="Original Content"
-->