---
title: The link between climate change, health and poverty
speaker: Cheryl Holder
description: >-
 For the poor and vulnerable, the health impacts of climate change are already
 here, says physician Cheryl Holder. Unseasonably hot temperatures, disease-carrying
 mosquitoes and climate gentrification threaten those with existing health
 conditions, while wealthier people move to higher ground. In an impassioned talk,
 Holder proposes impactful ways clinicians can protect their patients from
 climate-related health challenges -- and calls on doctors, politicians and others
 to build a care system that incorporates economic and social justice.
date: 2020-03-04
tags: ["climate-change","community","health-care","social-change","human-rights","activism","global-issues","humanity","poverty","health"]
slug: cheryl_holder_the_link_between_climate_change_health_and_poverty
---

I arrived in the US from Kingston, Jamaica in the summer of '68. My family of six crammed
into a small, two-bedroom apartment in a three-story walk-up in Brooklyn. The block had
several children — some spoke Spanish, some spoke English. Initially, I wasn't allowed to
play with them because, as my parents said, "Them too rambunctious" —

so I could only watch them from my window. Rollerskating was one of their favorite
activities. They loved hitching a ride at the back of the city bus, letting go of the rear
bumper as the bus arrived at the bottom of the block in front of my building. One day
there was a new girl with them. I heard the usual squeals of laughter interspersed with,
"Mira, mira! Mira, mira!" Spanish for, "Look, look!" The group grabbed onto the back of
the bus at the top of the block, and as they rolled down laughing and screaming, "Mira,
mira, mira, mira," the bus abruptly stopped. The experienced riders adjusted and quickly
let go, but the new girl lurched back and fell onto the pavement. She didn't move. The
adults outside ran to help her. The bus driver came out to see what had happened and call
for an ambulance. There was blood coming from her head. She didn't open her eyes. We
waited for the ambulance, and waited, and everyone said, "Where is the
ambulance?

Where is the ambulance?" The police finally arrived. An older black American man said,
"Ain't no ambulance coming." He said it again loudly to the cop. "You know ain't no
ambulance coming. They never send no ambulance here." The cop looked at my neighbors who
were getting frustrated, lifted the girl into the patrol car and left. I was 10 years old
at the time. I knew this wasn't right. I knew there was something more we could do. The
something I could do was become a doctor. I became an internist and committed my career to
caring for those we often call the underserved, the vulnerable, like those neighbors I had
when I first immigrated to America. During my early training years in Harlem in the '80s, I
saw a shocking increase in young men with HIV. Then when I moved [to] Miami, I noticed HIV
included women and children, primarily, poor black and brown people. Within a few years,
an infection seen in a select population became a worldwide epidemic. Again I got the urge
to do something.

Fortunately, with the help of activists and advocates and educators and physicians like me
who treat the disease, we found a way forward. There was a massive education effort to
reduce HIV transmission and provide legal protection for those with the disease. There was
a political will to make sure that as many patients as possible worldwide, regardless of
ability to pay, could get access to medication. Within a couple of decades there were new
treatments that transformed this life-threatening infection to a chronic disease, like
diabetes. Now there's a vaccine on the horizon. Over the last five to seven years, I've
noticed a different epidemic among the patients in Florida, and it looks something like
this. Ms. Anna Mae, a retired clerical worker living on a fixed income in Opa-locka,
walked in for medication refills. She had common chronic conditions of high blood
pressure, diabetes, heart disease and asthma with overlapping chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease — COPD. Ms.

Anna Mae was one of my more adherent patients, so I was surprised she needed refills of
her breathing medicines earlier than usual. Towards the end of the visit, she handed me a
Florida Power and Light form and asked me to sign it. She was behind on her light bill.
This form allowed physicians to document serious medical conditions requiring equipment
that would be impacted if the patient's electricity was disconnected. "But Ms. Anna Mae,"
I said, "you don't use any medical devices for breathing. I don't think you qualify."
Further questioning revealed she had been using her air conditioner day and night because
of the heat so she could breathe. Needing to buy more asthma inhalers left her little
money; she couldn't pay all the bills so it piled up. I filled out the form, but knowing
she might be denied, I also sent her to the social worker. Then there was Jorge, such a
sweet, kind man who often gifted our clinic with some of the fruits he sold on the streets
of Miami.

He had signs of worsening kidney function whenever he worked days on end on those hot
streets due to dehydration — just not enough blood getting to the kidneys. His kidneys
worked much better whenever he took some days off. But with no other support, what could
he do? As he says, "Rain or shine, cold or heat, I have to work."But the most damning case
of all may be Ms. Sandra Faye Twiggs of Fort Lauderdale with COPD. She was arrested after
fighting with her daughter over a fan. On her release from jail, she returned to her
apartment, coughed nonstop and died three days later. Here's what else I noticed: the data
show allergy seasons are starting weeks earlier, nighttime temperatures are rising, trees
are growing faster and mosquitos carrying dangerous diseases like Zika and dengue are
showing up in areas they didn't exist before. I also see signs of impending climate
gentrification. That's when richer people move into poorer neighborhoods that are at
higher elevation and less subject to flood damage from climate change.

Like in my patient Madame Marie who came in stressed and anxious, because she was evicted
from her apartment in Miami's Little Haiti to make room for a luxury apartment complex
whose developers understood that Little Haiti would not flood because it's ten feet above
sea level. An undeniable, clear and consistent warming trend is on the way. A health
emergency even bigger than HIV/AIDS seems to be in the works, and it was my low-income
patients that were dropping clues of what this would look like. This new epidemic is
climate change, and it has a variety of health effects. Climate change impacts us in four
major ways. Directly, through heat, extreme weather and pollution; through the spread of
the disease; through disruption of our food and water supply; and through disruption of
our emotional well-being. In medicine we use mnemonics to aid our memory, and this
mnemonic, "heatwave," shows the eight significant health effects of climate change. H: Heat
illnesses. E: Exacerbation of heart and lung disease. A: Asthma worsening. T: Traumatic
injuries, especially during extreme weather events. W: Water and foodborne illnesses. A:
Allergies worsening. V: Vector-borne diseases spreading, like Zika, dengue and Lyme. And E:
Emotional stresses increasing. Poor, vulnerable people are already feeling the effects of
climate change.

They are the proverbial canary in a coal mine. Truly, their experiences are like oracles
or prophecies. The guiding light for us to pay attention that we are doing something to
our world first that's hurting them first. But in a matter of time, we are next. If we act
together — doctors, patients and other health professionals — we will find solutions. We
have done this with the HIV crisis. There [it] was thanks to the activism of patients with
HIV that demanded medications and better research, and the collaboration of doctors and
scientists that we were able to control the epidemic. And then it was thanks to
international health agencies, NGOs, politicians and pharmaceutical companies that HIV
medication became available in low-income countries. There is no reason we can't also
apply this model of collaboration to address the health effects of climate change before
it's too late. Climate change is here. It's already damaging the health and homes of poor
people.

Like my patient Jorge, most of us will have to work, whether rain or shine, cold or heat.
But together these patients and their doctors, hand-in-hand, with some basic tools, can do
so much to make this climate transition less brutal for all of us. These patients inspired
me to found a clinicians' organization to fight climate change. We focus on understanding
the health effects of climate change, learning to advocate for patients with
climate-related illnesses and encouraging real-world solutions. A recent Gallup study
showed three of the most respected professions are nurses, doctors and pharmacists. So as
respected members of society, we have amplified voices to influence climate change policy
and politics. There is so much we can do. As clinicians, our many patient contacts allows
us to see things before others. And this puts us in an ideal position to be on the
frontlines of change. We can teach climate-related illnesses in our health-professional
schools.

We can collect data on our patients' climate-related conditions by making sure there are
billing codes to identify them. We can do climate-related health research. We can teach
how to have green practices in homes. We can advocate for our patient energy needs. We can
help them get safer homes. We can help them get necessary equipment in those homes when
conditions worsen. We can testify in front of lawmakers as to the findings, and we can
medically treat our patients' climate-related illnesses. Most importantly, we can help
prepare our patients mentally and physically for the health challenges they will face,
using a model of medicine that incorporates economic and social justice. This would mean
Ms. Sandra Faye Twiggs with COPD, who died after being released from jail after a fight
with her daughter over a fan, would have known that the heat in her apartment made her
sick and angry and seek a safer place to go for cooling.

Even better, her apartment would never have been so hot. From the poor, I've learned our
lives are not only vulnerable but are stories of resilience, innovation and survival. Like
that wise old man who loudly spoke truth to the cop that summer night: "Ain't no ambulance
coming," and compelled him to deliver that little girl to the hospital instead. You know
what? Listen up. If there's going to be a medical response to climate change, it is not
going to be just waiting for an ambulance. It is going to happen because we the clinicians
take the first step. We make so much noise that the issue cannot be ignored or
misunderstood. It is going to start with the stories our patients tell and the stories we
tell on their behalf. We're going to do what is right for our patients like we've always
done, but also what is right for our environment, for ourselves and for all the people on
this planet — all of them. Thank you.(Applause and cheers)

<!--
ad_duration=3.33
comment_count=7
event="TEDMED 2020"
has_talk_citation=1
intro_duration=11.82
is_subtitle_required="False"
is_talk_featured="True"
language="en"
language_swap="False"
native_language="en"
number_of_related_talks=6
number_of_speakers=1
number_of_subtitled_videos=5
number_of_tags=10
number_of_talk_download_languages=5
number_of_talk_more_resources=0
number_of_talk_recommendations=0
number_of_talks_take_actions=1
post_ad_duration=0.83
published_timestamp="2020-06-03 14:51:31"
recording_date="2020-03-04"
speaker_description="Physician"
speaker_is_published=1
speaker_name="Cheryl Holder"
talk_more_resources=[]
talk_name="The link between climate change, health and poverty"
talks_tags=["climate-change","community","health-care","social-change","human-rights","activism","global-issues","humanity","poverty","health"]
url_photo_speaker="https://pe.tedcdn.com/images/ted/0804de9adbe2a84dbfe48b6115eb7689aee6a7cc_254x191.jpg"
url_photo_talk="https://s3.amazonaws.com/talkstar-photos/uploads/3cd1c0c9-ffca-435c-af5e-97f9f87db54a/CherylHolder_2020P-embed.jpg"
url_webpage="https://www.ted.com/talks/cheryl_holder_the_link_between_climate_change_health_and_poverty"
video_type_name="TED Stage Talk"
-->