---
title: 4 questions you should always ask your doctor
speaker: Christer Mjåset
description: >-
 "Doctor, is this really necessary?" Backed by startling statistics about
 overtreatment, neurosurgeon Christer Mjåset explains the power of this and other
 simple questions in the context of medical treatment and surgery -- and shares
 how patients can better work with doctors to get the care they need.
date: 2018-05-04
tags: ["health-care","medicine","tedx","surgery"]
slug: christer_mjaset_4_questions_you_should_always_ask_your_doctor
---

I am a neurosurgeon, and I'm here to tell you today that people like me need your help.
And in a few moments, I will tell you how. But first, let me start off by telling you about
a patient of mine. This was a woman in her 50s, she was in generally good shape, but she
had been in and out of hospital a few times due to curative breast cancer treatment. Now
she had gotten a prolapse from a cervical disc, giving her radiating pain of a tense kind,
out into the right arm. Looking at her MRI before the consultation, I decided to suggest
an operation. Now, neck operations like these are standardized, and they're quick. But
they carry a certain risk. You make an incision right here, and you dissect carefully past
the trachea, the esophagus, and you try not to cut into the internal carotid
artery.

Then you bring in the microscope, and you carefully remove the disc and the prolapse in
the nerve root canal, without damaging the cord and the nerve root lying only millimeters
underneath. The worst case scenario is the damage to the cord, which can result in
paralysis from the neck down. Explaining this to the patient, she fell silent. And after a
few moments, she uttered a few very decisive words for me and for her. "Doctor, is this
really necessary?"

And you know what I realized, right there and then? It was not. In fact, when I get
patients like this woman, I tend to advise not to operate. So what made me do it this
time? Well, you see, this prolapse was so delicate, I could practically see myself pulling
it out of the nerve root canal before she entered the consultation room. I have to admit
it, I wanted to operate on her. I'd love to operate on her. Operating, after all, is the
most fun part of my job.

I think you can relate to this feeling. My architect neighbor says he loves to just sit
and draw and design houses. He'd rather do that all day than talk to the client paying for
the house that might even give him restrictions on what to do. But like every architect,
every surgeon needs to look their patient in the eye and together with the patient, they
need to decide on what is best for the person having the operation. And that might sound
easy. But let's look at some statistics. The tonsils are the two lumps in the back of your
throat. They can be removed surgically, and that's called a tonsillectomy. This chart
shows the operation rate of tonsillectomies in Norway in different regions. What might
strike you is that there is twice the chance that your kid — because this is for children
— will get a tonsillectomy in Finnmark than in Trondheim. The indications in both regions
are the same. There should be no difference, but there is. Here's another
chart.

The meniscus helps stabilize the knee and can be torn or fragmented acutely, topically
during sports like soccer. What you see here is the operation rate for this condition. And
you see that the operation rate in Møre og Romsdal is five times the operation rate in
Stavanger. Five times. How can this be? Did the soccer players in Møre og Romsdal play
more dirty than elsewhere in the country?

Probably not. I added some information now. What you see now is the procedures performed
in public hospitals, in light blue, the ones in private clinics are light green. There is
a lot of activity in the private clinics in Møre og Romsdal, isn't there? What does this
indicate? A possible economic motivation to treat the patients. And there's more. Recent
research has shown that the difference of treatment effect between regular physical
therapy and operations for the knee — there is no difference. Meaning that most of the
procedures performed on the chart I've just shown could have been avoided, even in
Stavanger. So what am I trying to tell you here? Even though most indications for
treatments in the world are standardized, there is a lot of unnecessary variation of
treatment decisions, especially in the Western world. Some people are not getting the
treatment that they need, but an even greater portion of you are being
overtreated."Doctor, is this really necessary?" I've only heard that question once in my
career.

My colleagues say they never heard these words from a patient. And to turn it the other
way around, how often do you think you'll get a "no" from a doctor if you ask such a
question? Researchers have investigated this, and they come up with about the same "no"
rate wherever they go. And that is 30 percent. Meaning, three out of 10 times, your doctor
prescribes or suggests something that is completely unnecessary. And you know what they
claim the reason for this is? Patient pressure. In other words, you. You want something to
be done. A friend of mine came to me for medical advice. This is a sporty guy, he does a
lot of cross-country skiing in the winter time, he runs in the summer time. And this time,
he'd gotten a bad back ache whenever he went jogging. So much that he had to stop doing
it. I did an examination, I questioned him thoroughly, and what I found out is that he
probably had a degenerated disc in the lower part of his spine. Whenever it got strained,
it hurt.

He'd already taken up swimming instead of jogging, there was really nothing to do, so I
told him, "You need to be more selective when it comes to training. Some activities are
good for you, some are not." His reply was, "I want an MRI of my back." "Why do you want
an MRI?" "I can get it for free through my insurance at work." "Come on," I said — he was
also, after all, my friend. "That's not the real reason." "Well, I think it's going to be
good to see how bad it looks back there." "When did you start interpreting MRI scans?" I
said.

"Trust me on this. You're not going to need the scan." "Well," he said, and after a while,
he continued, "It could be cancer."

He got the scan, obviously. And through his insurance at work, he got to see one of my
colleagues at work, telling him about the degenerated disc, that there was nothing to do,
and that he should keep on swimming and quit the jogging. After a while, I met him again
and he said, "At least now I know what this is."But let me ask you a question. What if all
of you in this room with the same symptoms had an MRI? And what if all the people in
Norway had an MRI due to occasional back pain? The waiting list for an MRI would
quadruple, maybe even more. And you would all take the spot on that list from someone who
really had cancer. So a good doctor sometimes says no, but the sensible patient also turns
down, sometimes, an opportunity to get diagnosed or treated."Doctor, is this really
necessary?" I know this can be a difficult question to ask. In fact, if you go back 50
years, this was even considered rude.

If the doctor had decided what to do with you, that's what you did. A colleague of mine,
now a general practitioner, was sent away to a tuberculosis sanatorium as a little girl,
for six months. It was a terrible trauma for her. She later found out, as a grown-up, that
her tests on tuberculosis had been negative all along. The doctor had sent her away on
nothing but wrong suspicion. No one had dared or even considered confronting him about it.
Not even her parents. Today, the Norwegian health minister talks about the patient health
care service. The patient is supposed to get advice from the doctor about what to do. This
is great progress. But it also puts more responsibility on you. You need to get in the
front seat with your doctor and start sharing decisions on where to go. So, the next time
you're in a doctor's office, I want you to ask, "Doctor, is this really necessary?" And in
my female patient's case, the answer would be no, but an operation could also be
justified."So doctors, what are the risks attached to this operation?" Well, five to ten
percent of patients will have worsening of pain symptoms.

One to two percent of patients will have an infection in the wound or even a rehemorrhage
that might end up in a re-operation. 0.5 percent of patients also experience permanent
hoarseness and a few, but still a few, will experience reduced function in the arms or
even legs."Doctor, are there other options?" Yes, rest and physical therapy over some time
might get you perfectly well."And what happens if I don't do anything?" It's not
recommended, but even then, there's a slight chance that you will get well. Four
questions. Simple questions. Consider them your new toolbox to help us. Is this really
necessary? What are the risks? Are there other options? And what happens if I don't do
anything? Ask them when your doctor wants to send you to an MRI, when he prescribes
antibiotics or suggests an operation. What we know from research is that one out of five of
you, 20 percent, will change your opinion on what to do.

And by doing that, you will not only have made your life a whole lot easier, and probably
even better, but the whole health care sector will have benefited from your decision. Thank
you.

<!--
ad_duration=3.33
comment_count=15
event="TEDxOslo"
external_start_time=0
has_talk_citation=1
intro_duration=11.82
is_subtitle_required="False"
is_talk_featured="True"
language="en"
language_swap="False"
native_language="en"
number_of_related_talks=6
number_of_speakers=1
number_of_subtitled_videos=23
number_of_tags=4
number_of_talk_download_languages=24
number_of_talk_more_resources=0
number_of_talk_recommendations=0
number_of_talks_take_actions=3
post_ad_duration=0.83
published_timestamp="2019-09-19 15:09:10"
recording_date="2018-05-04"
speaker_description="Neurosurgeon"
speaker_is_published=1
speaker_name="Christer Mjåset"
talk_more_resources=[]
talk_name="4 questions you should always ask your doctor"
talks_tags=["health-care","medicine","tedx","surgery"]
url_audio="https://download.ted.com/talks/ChristerMjaset_2018X.mp3?apikey=acme-roadrunner"
url_photo_speaker="https://pe.tedcdn.com/images/ted/4216f01291859e8403fff19d1903769044e3bd8d_254x191.jpg"
url_photo_talk="https://s3.amazonaws.com/talkstar-photos/uploads/0fc273bb-5169-4a75-b8b6-114bbb98786e/ChristerMjaset_2018X-embed.jpg"
url_webpage="https://www.ted.com/talks/christer_mjaset_4_questions_you_should_always_ask_your_doctor"
video_type_name="TEDx Talk"
-->