---
title: How we can turn the tide on climate
speaker: Christiana Figueres and Chris Anderson
description: >-
 Witness the unveiling of Countdown, a major global campaign to cut greenhouse gas
 emissions. TED has partnered with scientists, policy makers, organizations,
 activists and more to create an initiative that everyone in the world can be part
 of. Check out http://countdown.ted.com to learn how you can get involved — and
 help turn the tide on climate. [Note: there are two unusual features of this TED
 Talk. One, it's much longer than our normal, extending a full hour. Two, it's
 made up of contributions from more than a dozen people, including UN Secretary-General
 Antonio Guterres, Al Gore, Katharine Hayhoe, Jimmy Kimmel and Yuval Noah Harari,
 among others. We're putting it out there because the topic deserves this kind of
 prominence.]
date: 2019-12-04
tags: ["climate-change","environment","activism","sustainability","social-change","leadership","society","science"]
slug: christiana_figueres_and_chris_anderson_how_we_can_turn_the_tide_on_climate
---

[Citizens of the world][We face a global crisis of unprecedented scale][Please stand by
for a message from ... ][the Secretary-General of the United Nations António Guterres]The
climate emergency is the defining crisis of our time. We are in a race against time, and
we are losing. There is a growing tide of impatience, especially among young people, with
global inaction. We need more ambition from all: governments, cities, businesses,
investors and people everywhere. So I'm pleased you are launching TED Countdown. Your
influence and ideas can help accelerate momentum for a carbon-neutral world by 2050. That
is the only way to avert the worst impacts of global heating. We have the tools, the
science and the resources. Let us now get into this race with political will and energy.
To do anything less will be a betrayal of our entire human family and generations to come.
Thank you. Announcer: And now, please welcome one of the architects of the Paris Climate
Agreement Christiana Figueres and the head of TED, Chris Anderson.

Chris Anderson: Welcome, welcome. Something remarkable is going to happen in the next
hour. The world's single most alarming challenge, which looks something like this ... is
about to go head-to-head with some of the world's most amazing minds and courageous
hearts, which look something like you. The extraordinary audience we have here in New York
and around the world. Christiana, it's quite the crowd we get to hang out with this
morning. Christiana Figueres: It sure is, no kidding. It's a good thing that everyone is
here together, because actually, this initiative that we're just about to launch needs
everyone to participate. And here it is. Countdown. CA: Countdown is a global initiative to
cut greenhouse gas emissions. It's seeking bold solutions in five big areas, imagining
what could be achieved if different groups broke out of their silos and acted together.
Starting today, you can go to countdown.ted.com and sign up to join the
Countdown.

Early in 2020, we'll be sharing plans on how you can connect with others in your company,
your city or your school to engage in this issue. It's all leading up to global gatherings
on 10.10.2020. Everyone in the world is invited to participate. CF: And so that's why,
although I've been part of many initiatives along the years, I'm really excited about this
one. Because Countdown is an invitation to everyone, everyone, to play their part in
saving our planet and creating an exciting future. Politicians and citizens, CEOs and
their customers, their employees, their investors, old and young, north and south. CA:

I see what you did there.

But look, our goal is not to plunge in with something new that is competitive with the
amazing initiatives already out there. No. It's to identify the best solutions that have
already been worked on, to cross-fertilize them, to amplify them and then activate them by
bringing together these different groups. CF: And if that happens, we believe there is a
way out of the climate crisis. That's what we want to facilitate. But now, Chris,
question: Why are you and TED interested in participating and actually activating the
climate agenda, when I thought you were all about spreading ideas? CA: Well, indeed, that
has been our focused mission for the last 15 years, Ideas Worth Spreading. But last
summer, we concluded that the urgency of some issues, and especially climate, demanded
that we try to do more than just spread ideas, that we actually try to activate them. Now,
we're just a relatively small nonprofit — that would not amount to anything if we fail to
bring other people on board.

But the amazing thing is that that has happened. Everyone we've spoken to about this has
got excited about participating. And one of the key moments, frankly, was when you came on
board, Christiana. I mean, you were key to the Paris Agreement. And the world was stunned
at the consensus that emerged there. What was the key to creating that consensus? CF: I
would say it was to really challenge and change people's assumption about what is possible
if we set a shared intention and then collectively pursue it and achieve it. So our mantra
then, and continues to be: "Impossible is not a fact, it's an attitude." In fact, only an
attitude, and that is something we can change. CA: Well, that mantra, certainly, we're
going to have to hold onto in the months ahead, because the scientific consensus is
actually worsening. For a quick report from the front lines, here's the head of the
thousands of scientists who make up the IPCC, Dr.

Hoesung Lee.

Hoesung Lee: We recently released three special reports that show the damage and risks of
past and future climate change. They also show that stabilizing climate would imply a
drastic reduction in greenhouse gas emissions in the near term. Society will have to go
through unprecedented changes to meet this goal. Even limiting warming to 1.5 degrees
Celsius will bring more extreme weather, rising sea levels and water shortages in some
regions, and threats to food security and biodiversity. Higher temperature will bring more
of these damages, threatening lives and livelihoods of millions of people all around the
world. CA: We're lucky to have with us another world-leading scientist, Johan Rockström
here. He was responsible for creating the Planetary Boundaries framework. Johan, how
serious is our situation?

Johan Rockström: Last week, we released in "Nature" the 10-year update of the risk of
crossing tipping points, irreversible tipping points, in the Earth system. We know 15 such
tipping points, including the Greenland and West Antarctic ice shelf, and the permafrost
in the Siberian tundra, for example, and we today have observational evidence, I mean,
empirical evidence, that nine of the 15 have woken up and are on the move. We haven't
crossed the tipping point yet, the window is still open, but they are warning us that now
is the time to truly move, because the moment we cross them, like, for example,
approaching a tipping point in the Amazon rain forest, we would risk losing the battle,
because the planet will be taking over its self-reinforced warming. So that is why this
initiative is so incredibly important. Let's go. CA: Well said.

So, both are very clear there that this agenda of cutting emissions is absolutely crucial.
How has that been going? CF: Not very well, because despite what we know, despite
everything that science has told us, despite everything that we have done, including
adopting the Paris Agreement, we've actually been increasing greenhouse gases consistently
over the past few decades, to the point where we're now at 55 gigatons of carbon dioxide
equivalent that we are collectively, as humanity, emitting every year. And as we have
heard, we have one path, there is one path that we have to follow, and that is: Start now
to decrease emissions, instead of going up, go down — reverse the trend, bend the curve.
Reduce emissions, starting in 2020, to the point where we will be at one half the current
level of emissions by 2030, and then continue decreasing them, until we are at net zero by
2050. It's the only path that we can accept. CA: How do you even begin to start tackling a
goal as daunting as that? CF: Well, we could starting by breaking the simple, yet daunting,
challenge into its constituent pieces, five main areas. CA: And so these five together are
actually all huge, and if we can find compelling solutions in each of them, they would
actually add up to an action plan that matches the scale of the problem.

Well, here are the five. CF: Power. How rapidly can we move to 100 percent clean energy? CA:
The built environment. How can we re-engineer the stuff that surrounds us? CF: Transport.
How do we transform the ways we move — ourselves and goods? CA: Food. How can we spark a
worldwide shift to healthier food systems? CF: And certainly, nature. How extensively can
we re-green the earth? Now, it's worth noting that the answers to these questions and the
measures that we would undertake don't just reduce net emissions — they do that,
certainly, together, to zero — but they also point the way to a future that is much better
and genuinely exciting. So, think about cool new forms of transport, clean air, healthier
food, beautiful forests and oceans bursting with life. So, you know, solving the climate
crisis isn't about sacrificing and settling for a mediocre future, it's about the exact
opposite. It's about co-creating a much better future for all of us. CA: So how do we
tackle these questions?

CA: Let's take this question here and think about this. How extensively can we re-green
the earth? I mean, there are obviously many responses to this question, many proposals.
It's fundamentally about, "How do we increase the amount of sustainable photosynthesis on
planet Earth." Photosynthesis sequesters carbon. There could be proposals around giant
kelp forests or seagrass, or about forms of plants that have deeper roots and can
sequester across the planet. But suppose a major proposal that came out was about
reforestation. A massive, global reforestation campaign. I mean, a single organization, no
matter how big, cannot take that on. The key is for everyone to join forces, for
governments (with zoning), businesses to invest, investors to do that investing,
environmental groups and philanthropists who support them, and just a massive movement
among citizens everywhere, transforming their lawns, their cities, their neighborhoods,
going on trips together.

That is where, suddenly, you can dream about something really big. CF: So can we test that
theory? Because we are fortunate to have with us today someone who grew up inside a
tree-planting movement, probably the most well-recognized tree-planting movement. And she
is the daughter of the Nobel Prize winner Wangari Maathai, and she heads up the Wangari
Maathai Foundation today. So can we invite our very dear friend Wanjira
Mathai?

Wanjira Mathai: Thank you very much, Christiana and Chris, for doing this. Trees have
been, indeed, a part of my life for as long as I can remember, but we also know that for
centuries, trees and forests have cushioned us against the harsh impacts of climate
variation for very many years. In my lifetime, my mother, through the Green Belt Movement,
as you mentioned, inspired the planting of 50 million trees and counting through the work
of the Green Belt Movement, one organization. But the world now needs us to plant 100
times more trees than we did then. And the only way to do that is for all of us to come
together — cities, citizens, governments, companies, environmental organizations — and we
must believe, therefore, in the capacity for each of us to be potent agents of change. And
that together, we are a force. And I hope you will all join us.

CF: So together we are a force. I think Wanjira really hits it right there on the head,
because it's all about collaborating across a pretty broad spectrum of people. And
happily, there are representatives from all of those groups here today. And we will be
inviting you toward further engagement. But we wanted today to introduce you to a couple
of those people, speaking from their own perspective. So we would like to start with the
voice of a politician. We are incredibly honored to have with us today the former prime
minister of Bhutan, and I will have you know that Bhutan is the only country in the world
that actually absorbs more carbon than what it emits. Our good friend, Tshering
Tobgay.

Tshering Tobgay: My country is typical of the global south, in that we have not caused
this climate-change crisis. Indeed, we are blessed with lush forests and many bountiful
rivers that have enabled my country, Bhutan, to remain carbon-negative. And yet, climate
change threatens to destroy our forests. And to turn those very rivers into terrible
dangers for our people, as the Himalayan glaciers melt and threaten both near-term
flooding and the longer-term loss of our natural water reserves. So, I'm proud to join
this Countdown initiative and work with all of you and with you, and with
you,

constructively, to find solutions that are both powerful and just. Thank
you.

CA: Thank you.

CA: Business, of course, has a crucial role to play, and so do those who control the
world's vast pools of investment capital. I was pleased to make the acquaintance recently
of the chief investment officer of Japan's 1.6-trillion-dollar government pension fund.
It's actually the world's largest pension fund. He's willing and interested to come with
us on this journey and to bring others with him. So, somewhere is, I believe, Hiro. Hiro
Mizuno. And you're live. Welcome, Hiro.

Hiro Mizuno: Great. Thanks, Chris and Christiana, and the staff of TED, for making this
possible. As a person in charge of the largest pension fund in the world and responsible
for securing pension benefits for multiple generations, it is a hugely important issue,
how to manage climate risk. We recently analyzed our global portfolio, how it's aligned
with the Paris Agreement. It was diagnosed, our portfolio is on the path for more than
three degrees. Far away from the Paris Agreement goals. Our portfolio is not only sizable
but also one of the most globally diversified portfolios. So that means, the world is on
that path. I'm tired of hearing the same comment repeatedly from our portfolio companies
and, obviously, investment professionals: "We are realistic." Sorry, but being "realistic"
is no longer an option. We are fully aware of our responsibility as the world's largest
asset owner to inspire changes in the capital market.

We will be actively engaging with all actors in the capital market to move the needle. I
look forward to participating in this crucial dialogue with you all. Thank
you.

CF: I'm sure all of you know that throughout the past 12 to 18 months, what has really
been new and powerful and exciting is the amazing voices of so many young people, millions
of young people who are out there on the streets, with anger, with outrage, with despair,
and also, asking us to do our thing. And they have been inspired by Greta Thunberg but by
so many other fantastic young people in almost every country of the world. And today, we
are delighted to have four young activists come join us today.

Alexandria Villaseñor: This Friday, I'll have been on climate strike for 52 weeks. That's
an entire year. During that time, I found that many people don't know about climate change
or how serious the climate crisis is. So I founded Earth Uprising International to teach
young people about climate change, because when they know the science and the impacts,
they want to take action. Being an activist means making change happen. Jamie Margolin: I
became a climate activist because my life depends on it. I'm applying to colleges right
now, trying to plan for my future. There will be nothing to look forward to if we don't
take urgent action to stop the climate crisis now. I started the youth climate justice
movement called Zero Hour back in 2017, because this is zero hour to act on climate
change. We have no more time. It became clear to me that our leaders were not going to
take real action unless the people stood up and demanded it, so that's exactly what we
did. Natalie Sweet: I became a climate-justice activist because if I don't fight for the
rights of the people today, and for the people in the future, who will? Xiye Bastida: I
became a climate justice activist when I realized that the climate crisis impacts
marginalized communities the most, including my town in Mexico.

I strike with Fridays for Future every Friday, because our movement is not about gaining
momentum but about igniting cultural change. But the fact that thousands of students
strike for climate means that we are already implementing climate justice into every
aspect of our lives, which is already redefining the world. JM: Over the course of our
lifetimes, we've seen the Earth deteriorate at a rapid speed and groups of people
traumatized and displaced by an ever-increasing number of natural disasters. In 2030, I'll
be 28 years old. AV: I'll be 24 years old. XB: I will be 27.NS: I'll be 26. We want to be
able to hand the planet over to our children and our children's children, just like many
of you have been able to do. AV: So unless everyone — governments, companies, schools,
scientists and citizens — make a united commitment to reversing the damage that we've
caused, it will be too late. XB: We are not only asking you to take care of our future, we
are also asking you to take care of our past.

Indigenous people have been taking care of the Earth for thousands of years, which is why
indigenous philosophy is crucial when implementing climate action. JM: This climate crisis
can feel like an impossible thing to fix. But it's not. And it can't be, because failure
is simply not an option. Failure means losing everything we love and everything that
matters. So many of us are already working to save the future of our world, but it can't
just be on the next generation to fix. This is too much of a burden to just put on young
people's shoulders. It is time for you to go all hands on deck and do everything within
your power to save everything before it's too late. Are you with us? Audience:
Yes.(Applause and cheers)

CA: Thank you. Thank you, thank you. And then, of course, there's a crucial role to be
played by the world's storytellers, and those with influence on social media platforms.
Each of the following has expressed excitement to be part of this project. They've lent us
their names and support. We have some of them here today. Thank you so much for being
here. And let's hear from one of them, actually. Jimmy Kimmel: Hi, I'm Jimmy Kimmel, and I
was asked to explain why I'm passionate about climate change. And the reason I'm
passionate about climate change is the same reason people who are drowning are passionate
about lifeguards. I care about this planet, because I live on it. I don't want to move to
Mars, Mars seems terrible. I want my kids and their kids to be able to live on Earth, with
air they can breathe and water they can drink. That's why I care about climate change. And
also, I have a crush on Leonardo DiCaprio.

CF: So with all these people coming together, we have an opportunity to explore a new
space of possibility for solutions based on working together, challenging each other and
inspiring one another. So in October next year, we will be inviting more or less 1,000
people from different constituencies to meet in Bergen, Norway to align on specific
answers to our five big questions. CA: It will certainly be an epic event. But even more
significant than what happens in Norway is what happens elsewhere in the world. Because on
the final day of that conference, we're planning a major activation of our global TEDx
community. TEDx allows initiatives to organize local events, and there are now 4,000 such
events annually. Here's what they look like. They take place in more than 200 different
countries, generate more than a billion views annually on YouTube. We're expecting to see
events in hundreds of cities.

We'll be connecting our TEDx organizers with city mayors committed to a clean future for
their cities. This is the key to this. It's this connection between the powerful, who
usually own the conversation, and millions of people around the world. Because of the
zeitgeist shift that's happened in the last year or two, suddenly, ignition can happen
here, because there's enough critical groundswell. If we can give people visibility of
each other, connection to each other, let's dream a little here, and give each other
permission to dream. CF: So our goal here is to build connections with and among all of the
other organizations that are working on climate. For example, the Solutions Project is a
wonderful initiative founded by Mark Ruffalo and Don Cheadle. And let's hear from some of
the leaders that they have supported. CA: Welcome, you're live.

Wahleah Johns: Hi, my name is Wahleah Johns, I'm with Native Renewables, and we are
working to provide solar power for tribes throughout the world. We have over 15,000 Native
American families that don't have access to electricity, and we are working to provide
solar plus battery storage for these families in the United States that don't have access
to electricity. And they are located on my reservation, the Navajo Nation. Anna Lappé: Hi,
everyone, I am Anna Lappé with Real Food Media, and we work to uplift the stories of
farmers and ranchers as a key solution to the climate crisis. The global food system right
now is a huge contributor to this crisis, but it doesn't have to be. Farmers and ranchers
we really see as on the front lines of being part of solving the crisis. So we try to
share the stories of the millions of farmers from Andhra Pradesh, India to the highlands
of Oaxaca that are using regenerative agriculture to build healthy, carbon-rich soil, grow
good food and foster the kind of resilient communities that we need. Rahwa Ghirmatzion:
Hello from PUSH Buffalo — my name is Rahwa — where every day, residents are visioning,
planning and designing an equitable, holistic and sacred neighborhood, like where I'm
phoning in from, School 77, a renovated vacant school building that has the first 100
percent affordable community solar array in New York state installed by local
residents.

It's also serving 30 affordable senior apartments and a mix of intergenerational spaces
that serves as a community hub, where we're practicing new economy strategies towards a
livable planet. CF: Thank you. CA: Bravo.

CA: It's so great.

CF: So you see, this is about everyone. It's about cities, it's about grassroots
organizations, but it's also, of course, about business. And so we're inviting all
companies — underlined "all" — to join this initiative, to engage with your employees on
how you can best protect the planet and your future, at the same time. So early next year,
we'll be sharing a toolkit that can guide companies toward moving quickly towards
science-based targets, which gets them then to net zero emissions by 2050 at the
latest. CA: So think about this, because as an individual, many individuals feel powerless
on this issue. But if you were to team up with others in your company, you might be amazed
at how much power you actually have. Almost all emissions come from a company somewhere on
the planet. And the thing is, many CEOs today are actually eager to help solve the
problem. We just heard this morning from Anand Mahindra, who heads India's biggest
business group, that he is personally committed on this issue and wants to be part of this
journey with us — he's a supporter of Countdown.

CEOs will be able to move much faster if there's a group of employees there to brainstorm
with, to support them, to keep that sort of sense of urgency on the topic. Our website
will help you connect with others in your company and give you guidance on smart questions
to ask, initiatives to suggest, because if companies can be persuaded to do the right
thing, suddenly, this problem seems to become solvable. CF: So all of these efforts are
building toward one fantastic day: Saturday, October 10, 2020 — that is, "10.10.2020." —
easy to remember — when this fantastic gathering will take place around the world. And we
hope to have, by then, thrilling news of the report of the very specific solutions that
nations, cities, companies, citizens are actually already collaborating on by then. It's a
day when every citizen of the planet is invited to participate. Your one ticket of
entrance is you are a citizen of the planet. CA: Key to the success of the event is for
this to happen at scale.

We want to make it easy for anyone and everyone to find out about the initiative and to
play an active part in it. But how do you do that? You know, the world's a noisy place. I
mean, the TED platform can help a bit, maybe, but there's a much bigger content platform
out there. It's called YouTube. And we're delighted to be working with them on this
endeavor. We'll be inviting many of their top creators to be part of Countdown.
Collectively, they could reach an audience in the many millions. In fact, let's meet one
of them, Dr. Joe Hanson of "Hot Mess," a new web series about the impact of climate change
on all of us.

My name's Joe Hanson, and I am a YouTube educator. And you can count me in. I work with
tomorrow's scientists, inventors and leaders, and they deserve to know the truth of what
the science says, so that they can help us invent a better future for everyone. CA: Imagine
that multiplied by many others — it's very, very exciting, honestly. CF: And of course,
when it comes to spreading the word, every one of you in this room can actually play your
part. So if you have any way of reaching anyone who is concerned about building a better
future — and that should be every single one of us — please, invite them to join
Countdown. CA: There's one more card up our sleeve. We're excited to unveil a global media
campaign. This is a campaign with a difference. Just as TEDx exploded by being allowed to
grow as a grassroots phenomenon, this campaign is designed to be co-opted everywhere on
the planet. If you happen to own a billboard company, or a TV station, or a radio station,
or a website, or a social media account, we invite all of you to take the images you're
about to see and to just spread them far and wide.

Our website will make this easy. We actually plan to translate them into many languages,
courtesy of our volunteer army of more than 20,000 translators worldwide. Some of them are
with us here. If you're a TED translator, would you wave, please? CF: There we
go.

CA: Your work carries powerful ideas to every corner of the earth. We're so proud of you,
so grateful to you. So this campaign's designed to grab attention and to communicate, yes,
urgency but also a little smidgen of hope. We think it might be that combination is what
is needed to really drive action. We'd love you to let us know what you think of these. CF:
Right now.[Choose your future.]

[Turn fear into action Join the countdown.]

[Action inspires action Join the countdown. The Earth will thank you.]

[10.10.2020 Climate's Day of Destiny. You're invited.]CF: Remember the date.[Mass
destruction. No biggie. (If we prevent it.)]

[Giant asteroid heading our way The common enemy that can unite us.]

[We love natural disasters anyway — said no one ever. So why are we causing
them?]

[Relax, there's nothing you can do about the climate Unless you work for a company. Or
live in a city. Or own a phone. Or a brain.][Cause of death: Apathy. But there's an
antidote.]

[Stop f*cking everything up Inaction on climate is obscene. We can fix this.]CA: Too
much? CF: No, not too much, yay, go for it.

[Have you gotten any action lately? Here's your chance. Help turn the tide on
climate.]

CA: I didn't like this one, but my team, you know —CF: Apparently, there are many who do
like it.

[We give up. Sincerely, TED. Spreading ideas isn't enough. It's time to act. Join us?]CA:
This is, unfortunately, truer than you know.[Some things matter more than partisan
politics Come fight the enemy that can unite us.]

[Stop burnout Your company can help save the earth.][Give the planet more than you take
from it Join the countdown.][Despair, meet hope We can avoid climate catastrophe if we
take urgent action now.]CA: That's it.(Applause and cheers)CF: To bring this full circle,
we would like to bring someone very special in.

Hi, I'm Claire O'Neill. I am the COP president-designate for next year's Conference of the
Parties, the annual UN climate change talks, which will be in the UK, and we're looking
forward to welcoming you there. But right now, I'm in Spain, in Madrid, at COP25, this
annual event where we send negotiators and activists from all over the world to see what
we can do to reduce CO2 emissions. But the problem is this: emissions are going up, not
down. And what I'm feeling is that 2020 is the year of action, the year where we have to
stop talking and we have to start acting. And not just here, in these conference centers,
but everybody. And so the value of the TED process, the value of what we're all doing
together is that we're spreading out the conversations and the solutions from inside this
space out to everybody. And I'm really looking forward to working with the TED group over
the next year.

2020, for me, will be the most important year for climate action, and we're all going to
deliver this together.

CF: OK, friends, so we're nearly there but just a few more very special snippets. First, a
word from one of the many great minds who will be accompanying us on this journey. A
message from the great author, historian and futurist Yuval Harari. Yuval Harari: Climate
change is about inequality. Inequality between the rich, who are mainly responsible for
it, and the poor, who will suffer the most. Inequality between us, Homo sapiens, who
control this planet, and the other animals, who are our helpless victims. Inequality
between the scientists, who painstakingly search for the truth, and the professional
deceivers, who spread falsehoods at the click of a button. Climate change is about making
a choice. What kind of planet do we want to inhabit, and what kind of humans do we want to
be? A choice between greed and compassion, between carelessness and responsibility,
between closing our eyes to the truth and opening our hearts to the world.

Climate change is a crisis, but for humans, a crisis is always also an opportunity. If we
make the right choices in the coming years, we cannot only save the ecosystem, but we can
also create a more just world and make ourselves better people.

CF: So isn't that a powerful framing of what we have ahead of us, and honestly, I think it
is tragic that the power of transformation that we have ahead of us is so severely
diminished by those who would want to politicize the issue and separate it into partisan
politics. It cannot be a partisan issue, it cannot be a politicized issue. Happily, there
are some who are working against that. Today, we have one of those people, a fantastically
courageous climate scientist, who is a committed Christian, and who has been working on
this issue with conservatives and with the religious and spiritual communities for years,
with incredible courage. Katharine Hayhoe.

Katherine Hayhoe: When someone says climate change, we often think, "Oh, that's just an
environmental issue. People who are tree huggers or scientists care about it, or maybe
people who are on the left hand-side of the political spectrum." But the reality is,
whether we know it or not, we already care about climate change, no matter who we are.
Why? Because climate change affects everything we already care about today. It affects our
health, it affects the food we eat, the water we drink, the air that we breathe. Climate
change affects the economy and national security. I care about a changing climate because
it is, as the military calls it, a threat multiplier. It takes issues like poverty and
hunger, disease, lack of access to clean water, even political instability, and
exacerbates or amplifies them. That's why, to care about a changing climate, we don't have
to be a certain type of person.

A thermometer isn't blue or red, liberal or conservative — it gives us the same number no
matter how we vote. And we are all affected by the impacts of a changing climate. So to
care about a changing climate, all we have to be is one thing: a human, living on planet
Earth. And we're all that.

CF: And finally, the man who brought this issue so powerfully to everyone's attention
years ago and has continued tirelessly to work on that issue ever since. The one and very
only, Al Gore.

Al Gore: Thank you.

Thank you so much, Christiana, and thank you for your outstanding leadership, and thank
you, Chris Anderson and the entire TED community, YouTube and all of the others who are
joining in this fantastic initiative. I have just three messages. Number one, this crisis
is incredibly urgent. Just yesterday, the scientists gave us the report that emissions are
still going up. Every single day, we're putting 150 million tons of man-made global
warming pollution into the thin shell of atmosphere surrounding our planet. The
accumulated

<!--
ad_duration=0
comment_count=44
event="Countdown"
external_start_time=0
has_talk_citation=0
intro_duration=0
is_subtitle_required="False"
is_talk_featured="True"
language="en"
language_swap="False"
native_language="en"
number_of_related_talks=6
number_of_speakers=2
number_of_subtitled_videos=0
number_of_tags=8
number_of_talk_download_languages=14
number_of_talk_more_resources=0
number_of_talk_recommendations=0
number_of_talks_take_actions=1
post_ad_duration=0
published_timestamp="2019-12-12 14:17:45"
recording_date="2019-12-04"
speaker_description="Head of TED"
speaker_is_published=1
speaker_name="Christiana Figueres and Chris Anderson"
talk_more_resources=[]
talk_name="How we can turn the tide on climate"
talks_tags=["climate-change","environment","activism","sustainability","social-change","leadership","society","science"]
url_audio="https://download.ted.com/talks/PressCountdown_2019S.mp3?apikey=acme-roadrunner"
url_photo_speaker="https://pe.tedcdn.com/images/ted/15a78b07d0340fcf8f391e7529b6f4b050a60cc0_254x191.jpg"
url_webpage="https://www.ted.com/talks/christiana_figueres_and_chris_anderson_how_we_can_turn_the_tide_on_climate"
video_type_name="TED Stage Talk"
-->