---
title: When local news dies, so does democracy
speaker: Chuck Plunkett
description: >-
 Nearly 1,800 newsrooms have shuttered across the US since 2004, leaving many
 communities unseen, unheard and in the dark. In this passionate talk and rallying
 cry, journalist Chuck Plunkett explains why he rebelled against his employer to
 raise awareness for an industry under threat of extinction -- and makes the case
 for local news as an essential part of any healthy democracy.
date: 2019-06-22
tags: ["journalism","society","news","media","tedx","democracy"]
slug: chuck_plunkett_when_local_news_dies_so_does_democracy
---

I've been a journalist for more than 23 years, at the "Arkansas Democrat-Gazette," the
"Pittsburgh Tribune Review" and most recently, "The Denver Post."

When I started at "The Denver Post" in 2003, it was among the country's 10 largest
newspapers, with an impressive subscriber base and nearly 300 journalists. At the time, I
was in my 30s. Any ambitious journalist that age aspires to work for one of the big
national papers, like "The New York Times" or "The Wall Street Journal." But I was simply
blown away by my first few weeks at "The Denver Post," and I thought, "This is going to be
my paper. I can make a career right here."Well, seven years passed, we were sold to a
hedge fund, Alden Global Capital. Within a few years —

Some of you know this story.

Within a few years, buyouts ordered by past and present owners would reduce the newsroom
by nearly half. And I understood. The rule of thumb used to be that 80 percent of a
newspaper's revenue came from pricy print ads and classifieds. With emerging giants like
Google and Facebook and Craigslist, those advertizing dollars were evaporating. The entire
industry was undergoing a massive shift from print to digital. Alden's orders were to be
digital first. Take advantage of blogs, video and social media. They said that one day,
the money we made online would make up for the money we lost in print. But that day never
came. In 2013, we won a Pulitzer Prize for covering the Aurora theater shooting. Alden
ordered that more journalists be cut. Again, and again, and again, and again. We were
forced to say goodbye to talented, hardworking journalists we considered not just friends
but family. Those of us left behind were stretched impossibly thin, covering multiple
beats and writing rushed articles.

Inside a windowless meeting room in March of 2018, we learned that 30 more would have to
go. This paper that once had 300 journalists would now have 70.And it didn't make sense.
Here, we'd won multiple Pulitzer Prizes. We shifted our focus from print to digital, we
hit ambitious targets and email from the brass talked up the Post's profit margins, which
industry experts pegged at nearly 20 percent. So if our company was so successful and so
profitable, why was our newsroom getting so much smaller and smaller? I knew that what was
happening in Colorado was happening around the country. Since 2004, nearly 1,800 newsrooms
have closed. You've heard of food deserts. These are news deserts. They are communities,
often entire counties, with little to zero news coverage whatsoever. Making matters worse,
many papers have become ghost ships, pretending to sail with a newsroom but really just
wrapping ads around filler copy. More and more newsrooms are being sold off to companies
like Alden.

And in that meeting, their intentions couldn't have been clearer. Harvest what you can,
throw away what's left. So, working in secret with a team of eight writers, we prepared a
special Sunday Perspective section on the importance of local news.

The Denver rebellion launched like a missile, and went off like a hydrogen bomb.[In An
Extraordinary Act Of Defiance, Denver Post Urges Its Owner To Sell The Paper]['Denver
Post' Editorial Board Publicly Calls Out Paper's Owner][On The Denver Post, vultures and
superheroes](Applause and cheers)Clearly, we weren't alone in our outrage. But as
expected, I was forced to resign.

And a year later, nothing's changed. "The Denver Post" is but a few lone journalists doing
their admirable best in this husk of a once-great paper. Now, at least some of you are
thinking to yourself, "So what?" Right? So what? Let this dying industry die. And I kind
of get that. For one thing, the local news has been in decline for so long that many of
you may not even remember what it's like to have a great local paper. Maybe you've seen
"Spotlight" or "The Paper," movies that romanticize what journalism used to be. Well, I'm
not here to be romantic or nostalgic. I'm here to warn you that when local news dies, so
does our democracy. And that should concern you —(Applause and cheers)And that should
concern you, regardless of whether you subscribe. Here's why. A democracy is a government
of the people. People are the ultimate source of power and authority. A great local
newsroom acts like a mirror. Its journalists see the community and reflect it back. That
information is empowering.

Seeing, knowing, understanding — this is how good decisions are made. When you have a great
local paper, you have journalists sitting in on every city council meeting. Listening in
to state house and senate hearings. Those important but, let's face it, sometimes
devastatingly boring committee hearings.

Journalists discover the flaws and ill-conceived measures and those bills fail, because
the public was well-informed. Readers go to the polls and they know the pros and cons
behind every ballot measure, because journalists did the heavy lifting for them. Even
better, researchers have found that reading a local paper can mobilize 13 percent of
nonvoters to vote. Thirteen percent.

That's the number that can change the outcome of many elections. When you don't have a
great local paper, voters are left stranded at the polls, confused, trying to make their
best guess based on a paragraph of legalese. Flawed measures pass. Well-conceived but
highly technical measures fail. Voters become more partisan. Recently in Colorado, our
governor's race had more candidates than anyone can remember. In years past, journalists
would have thoroughly vetted, scrutinized, fact-checked, profiled, debated every contender
in the local paper. "The Denver Post" did its best. But in the place of past levels of
rigorous reporting and research, the public is increasingly left to interpret
dog-and-pony-show stump speeches and clever campaign ads for themselves. With advertizing
costing what it does, electability comes down to money. So by the end of the primaries,
the only candidates left standing were the wealthiest and best-funded.

Many experienced and praise-worthy candidates never got oxygen, because when local news
declines, even big-ticket races become pay-to-play. Is it any surprise that our new
governor was the candidate worth more than 300 million dollars? Or that billionaire
businessmen like Donald Trump and Howard Schultz can seize the political stage? I don't
think this is what the Founding Fathers had in mind when they talked about free and fair
elections.(Applause and cheers)Now this is exactly why we can't just rely on the big
national papers, like "The Journal" and "The Times" and "The Post." Those are tremendous
papers, and we need them now, my God, more than ever before. But there is no world in
which they could cover every election in every county in the country. No. The newsroom
best equipped to cover your local election ought to be your local newsroom. If you're
lucky and still have one. When election day is over, a great local paper is still there,
waiting like a watchdog.

When they're being watched, politicians have less power, police do right by the public,
even massive corporations are on their best behavior. This mechanism that for generations
has helped inform and guide us no longer functions the way it used to. You know intimately
what the poisoned national discourse feels like, what a mockery of reasoned debate it has
become. This is what happens when local newsrooms shutter and communities across the
country go unwatched and unseen. Until we recognize that the decline of local news has
serious consequences for our society, this situation will not improve. A properly staffed
local newsroom isn't profitable, and in this age of Google and Facebook, it's not going to
be. If newspapers are vital to our democracy, then we should fund them like they're vital
to our democracy.(Applause and cheers)We cannot stand by and let our watchdogs be put
down. We can't let more communities vanish into darkness.

It is time to debate a public funding option before the fourth estate disappears, and with
it, our grand democratic experiment. We need much more than a rebellion. It is time for a
revolution. Thank you.(Applause and cheers)

<!--
ad_duration=3.33
comment_count=15
event="TEDxMileHigh"
external_duration=0
external_start_time=0
has_talk_citation=1
intro_duration=11.82
is_subtitle_required="False"
is_talk_featured="True"
language="en"
language_swap="False"
native_language="en"
number_of_related_talks=6
number_of_speakers=1
number_of_subtitled_videos=16
number_of_tags=6
number_of_talk_download_languages=16
number_of_talk_more_resources=0
number_of_talk_recommendations=1
number_of_talks_take_actions=0
post_ad_duration=0.83
published_timestamp="2020-03-03 16:18:10"
recording_date="2019-06-22"
speaker_description="Journalist"
speaker_is_published=1
speaker_name="Chuck Plunkett"
talk_more_resources=[]
talk_name="When local news dies, so does democracy"
talk_recommendations_blurb="More resources curated by Chuck Plunkett"
talks_tags=["journalism","society","news","media","tedx","democracy"]
talks_take_action=[]
url_audio="https://download.ted.com/talks/ChuckPlunkett_2019X.mp3?apikey=acme-roadrunner"
url_photo_speaker="https://pe.tedcdn.com/images/ted/2ba8d77eb9ff555a46bd287a45fdc6161454fe65_254x191.jpg"
url_photo_talk="https://s3.amazonaws.com/talkstar-photos/uploads/8274527f-4abf-4348-99ff-64cf2fe1bc2c/ChuckPlunkett_2019X-embed.jpg"
url_webpage="https://www.ted.com/talks/chuck_plunkett_when_local_news_dies_so_does_democracy"
video_type_name="TEDx Talk"
-->