---
title: Why gun violence can't be our new normal
speaker: Dan Gross
description: >-
 It doesn't matter whether you love or hate guns; it's obvious that the US would
 be a safer place if there weren't thousands of them sold every day without
 background checks. Dan Gross, president of the Brady Campaign to Prevent Gun
 Violence, makes a passionate, personal appeal for something that more than 90
 percent of Americans want: background checks for all gun sales. "For every great
 movement around the world, there's a moment where you can look back and say,
 'That's when things really started to change,'" Gross says. "For the movement to
 end gun violence in America, that moment is here."
date: 2016-02-17
tags: ["activism","big-problems","children","choice","community","debate","future","government","goalsetting","parenting","law","social-change","marketing","policy","guns","violence"]
slug: dan_gross_why_gun_violence_can_t_be_our_new_normal
---

OK, so, confession: I've always been weirdly obsessed with advertising. I remember
watching Saturday morning cartoons, paying more attention to the commercials than to the
shows, trying to figure out how they were trying to get inside my head. Ultimately, that
led me to my dream job. I became a partner at a big New York ad agency. But then, all of
that suddenly changed on February 23, 1997, when my little brother Matt was shot in the
head in a shooting that happened on the observation deck of the Empire State Building.
Suddenly, my family was thrown into the middle of a nightmare, being told that my brother
was going to die, actually being given the opportunity to say goodbye to him, then several
emergency brain surgeries and now what's amounted, for Matt, to a lifetime spent
courageously recovering from a traumatic brain injury. He is definitely my hero. But as
much as 

— yeah, deserves it —

But as much as this tragedy was a nightmare for my family, I often think about how much
worse it could have been; in fact, how much worse it is for the 90 families every day who
aren't as fortunate, who lose loved ones — brothers, sisters, sons, daughters, parents.
They don't all make national headlines. In fact, most of them don't. They go largely
unnoticed, in a nation that's kind of come to accept a disgraceful national epidemic as
some kind of new normal. So I quit my job in advertising to try and do something about this
disgraceful national epidemic, because I came to realize that the challenges to preventing
gun violence are actually the same ones that made me love advertising, which is to try to
figure out how to engage people. Only instead of doing it to sell products, doing it to
save lives. And that comes down to finding common ground, where what I want overlaps with
what you want.

And you might be surprised to learn, when it comes to gun violence, just how much common
ground there is. Let's look, for example, at people who love to hunt, a sport enjoyed by
millions across the US. It's a proud tradition. Families. In some places, the first day of
hunting season is actually a school holiday. What do hunters want? Well, they want to
hunt. They love their guns. They believe deeply in the Second Amendment right to own those
guns. But that doesn't mean there isn't common ground. In fact, there's a lot of it,
starting with the basic idea of keeping guns out of dangerous hands. This isn't about
taking certain guns away from all people. It's about keeping all guns away from certain
people, and it's the people that, it turns out, we all agree shouldn't have guns:
convicted violent criminals, domestic abusers, the dangerously mentally ill. We can all
appreciate how Brady background checks have been incredibly effective in keeping guns out
of those dangerous hands.

In 20 years, Brady background checks at federally licensed firearm dealers have blocked
2.4 million gun sales to those people that we all agree shouldn't have
guns.

And whether you love guns or hate guns, you probably also appreciate that there shouldn't
be thousands of gun sales every day at guns shows or online without those Brady background
checks, just like there shouldn't be two lines to get on an airplane — one with security
and one with no security. And —

And the numbers show the overwhelming agreement among the American public: 90 percent of
Americans support expanding Brady background checks to all gun sales — including 90
percent of Republicans, more than 80 percent of gun owners, more than 70 percent of NRA
members. This is not a controversial idea. In fact, only six percent of the American
public disagrees. That's about the percentage of the American public that believes the
moon landing was a fake.

And it's also about the percentage that believes the government is putting
mind-controlling technology in our TV broadcast signals. That's the extent to which we
agree about background checks. But what about the 300 million guns already out there in
homes across America? Well first, it's important to realize that those guns are mostly in
the hands and homes of decent, law-abiding people like you and me, who want what we all
want — including keeping our families safe. In fact, that's why more and more people are
choosing to own guns. Ten years ago, 42 percent of the American public believed —
incorrectly — that a gun makes your home safer. Today, that number is 63 percent. Why? I
kind of hate to say it, because it gets to the dark underbelly of advertising, which is if
you tell a big enough lie enough times, eventually that lie becomes the truth. And that's
exactly what's happened here. The corporate gun lobby has spent billions of dollars
blocking the CDC from doing research into the public health epidemic of gun violence;
blocking pediatricians from talking to parents about the dangers of guns in the home;
blocking smart-gun technology and other technology that would prevent kids from firing
parents' guns and would save lives.

They're desperate to hide the truth, because they view the truth as a threat to their
bottom line. And every day, people are dying as a result. And a lot of those people are
children. Every day in the US, nine kids are just shot unintentionally. 900 children and
teens take their own lives every year. And here's the thing: they're almost all with a
parent's gun. Even two-thirds of school shootings happen with a gun taken from the home,
including the terrible tragedy at Sandy Hook. I meet so many of these parents; it's the
most heartbreaking part of my job. These are not bad people. They're just living with the
unimaginable consequences of a very bad decision, made based on very bad information that
was put into their minds by very bad people, who know good and well the misery that
they're causing, but just don't care. And the result is a nightmare — not only for
families like mine, but for, really, at the end of the day, all of us. But I'm not here to
talk about the nightmare of gun violence.

I'm here to talk about our dream, and it's a dream we all share, which is the dream of a
better, safer, future. For my organization, for the Brady Campaign, that dream is
reflected in the bold goal to cut the number of gun deaths in the US in half by 2025. And
I hope to leave all of you here tonight with a strong sense of exactly why that dream is
so absolutely within reach. Because folks, for every great movement around the world,
there's a moment where you can look back and say, "That's when things really started to
change." And I'm here to say that for the movement to end gun violence in America, that
moment is here.

We are so clearly at a tipping point, because the American public has come together by the
millions like never before, based on that common ground, to say, "Enough." Enough of the
mass shootings in malls and movie theaters and churches and schools. Enough of the daily
terror of gun violence in homes and streets that's claimed the lives of women and young
black men in staggering proportions. Enough of easy access to guns by the people that we
all agree shouldn't have them. And enough of a small group of craven politicians putting
the interests of the corporate gun lobby ahead of the people they have been elected to
represent. Enough.

And the really exciting thing is, it's not just the usual suspects like me that are saying
it anymore. It's so much bigger than that. And if you want proof, let's start where most
conversations in the US seem to start — with Kim Kardashian.

And here's the thing: it's not really a joke. I mean, think about when issues change. It's
when they go from being political and advocacy issues to being part of pop culture, voices
coming from everywhere, celebrities using their platforms, musicians, athletes. The NBA
has come forward. Conservative pundits that you never would have imagined have come
forward. There's real cultural change — I even hear there's a TED Talk about it this year.
That's the extent to which this cultural change is happening. And yes, Kim Kardashian has
made an unsolicited passionate appeal to her 35 million Twitter followers for expanded
background checks. Let's look at the political elections that are heating up. This used to
be the classic third-rail issue for Democrats. Couldn't run from it fast enough. Now
candidates are running on it. Some are being forced to reverse very bad positions they
defended very comfortably, until very recently.

For somebody like me, watching people wave around their negative NRA ratings — it's almost
surreal to watch. We're still outfunded, yes, by the corporate gun lobby, and ultimately
that needs to change. But you know what? We're smarter and we're scrappier, and we have
the truth on our side. And we're on offense. You know, they say that the Internet
democratizes information. Social media and some of the organizing tools that plug into it
have democratized activism. It's allowed us to show what 90 percent support really looks
like. Sometimes I think of it — you know, we're converging and attacking instantly by the
millions, kind of like white blood cells. It's enabled us to start to really close — and
this is the bottom line — close that disgraceful disconnect between what the American
public wants and what our elected leaders are doing about it. Until recently, the narrative
in Congress was that calls from the other side, from that six percent, outnumbered calls
from our side 10 to one.

We're flipping that narrative on its head. After that recent terrible tragedy in San
Bernardino, we jammed Congressional switchboards. We put 15,000 calls into Congress in 24
hours. And you know what? We got a vote on a bill that nobody thought was going to see the
light of day anytime soon. We're seeing real movement to repeal some of the most evil,
ugly gun lobby legislation passed over the last dark decade. The stranglehold of the gun
lobby is clearly being broken. We've seen President Obama's historic executive actions.
They don't go all the way, but they are going to save lives, because they expand Brady
background checks to thousands of gun sales that didn't have them previously. And we're
marching across the country — we're not just waiting for Congress to act; that would
almost be the definition of insanity. We're marching across the country, state by state,
marriage-equality style. And you know what? We're winning.

Congress is almost always the last to wake up and realize that it's on the wrong side of
history. And when they do, it's always because the American public shakes them. And that's
exactly what we're doing right now, as we're in this tipping point. You know, recently I
was flying cross-country to give a speech to a large group like this, although far less
intimidating, and the woman sitting next to me happened to be binge-watching one of my
all-time favorite TV shows, "Mad Men," a period TV show about advertising in the 1960s.
And as I was trying to think about how to end my remarks, I'd glance up at her screen
every now and then, and it seemed that every time I did, I'd see somebody smoking in an
office or around children or while pregnant or drinking and driving or driving without
seat belts or sexually harassing a coworker. And ultimately it dawned on me: what
tremendous inspiration to those of us who have this dream to end gun violence.

I mean, think about how much the world has changed in a relatively short period of time,
how all those behaviors that were once considered commonplace or normal — some even
glamorous or sexy — have become stigmatized in just a generation or two, once they became
conversations about our common ground. That is the magnitude of the change we have the
potential to create around gun violence. And that's my dream, that maybe someday, some
period TV show will depict the terrible nightmare of gun violence, and a future generation
of children might only be able to imagine how terrible it must have been. Thank
you.

Thank you.

Thank you.

<!--
ad_duration=3.33
event="TED2016"
external_start_time=0
has_talk_citation=1
intro_duration=11.82
is_subtitle_required="False"
is_talk_featured="True"
language="en"
language_swap="False"
native_language="en"
number_of_related_talks=6
number_of_speakers=1
number_of_subtitled_videos=19
number_of_tags=16
number_of_talk_download_languages=19
number_of_talk_more_resources=0
number_of_talk_recommendations=1
number_of_talks_take_actions=1
post_ad_duration=0.83
published_timestamp="2016-03-29 14:58:52"
recording_date="2016-02-17"
speaker_description="Gun-control activist"
speaker_is_published=1
speaker_name="Dan Gross"
talk_more_resources=[]
talk_name="Why gun violence can't be our new normal"
talk_recommendations_blurb="Check out these additional resources on the fight to end gun violence, curated by Dan Gross."
talks_tags=["activism","big-problems","children","choice","community","debate","future","government","goalsetting","parenting","law","social-change","marketing","policy","guns","violence"]
url_audio="https://download.ted.com/talks/DanGross_2016.mp3?apikey=acme-roadrunner"
url_photo_speaker="https://pe.tedcdn.com/images/ted/70f4c622be031e21c1c5129bcfe3fbd04125cb70_254x191.jpg"
url_photo_talk="https://s3.amazonaws.com/talkstar-photos/uploads/545f89ce-f76c-4c44-854f-b1b4edc77312/DanGross_2016-embed.jpg"
url_webpage="https://www.ted.com/talks/dan_gross_why_gun_violence_can_t_be_our_new_normal"
video_type_name="TED Stage Talk"
-->