---
title: Maps that show us who we are (not just where we are)
speaker: Danny Dorling
description: >-
 What does the world look like when you map it using data? Social geographer Danny
 Dorling invites us to see the world anew, with his captivating and insightful
 maps that show Earth as it truly is -- a connected, ever-changing and fascinating
 place in which we all belong. You'll never look at a map the same way again.
date: 2016-04-15
tags: ["map","global-development","data","humanity","economics","population","visualizations","tedx"]
slug: danny_dorling_maps_that_show_us_who_we_are_not_just_where_we_are
---

I'd like you to imagine the world anew. I'd like to show you some maps, which have been
drawn by Ben Hennig, of the planet in a way that most of you will never have seen the
planet depicted before. Here's an image that you're very familiar with. I'm old enough that
I was actually born before we saw this image. Apparently some of my first words were
"moona, moona," but I think that's my mom having a particular fantasy about what her baby
boy could see on the flickering black and white TV screen. It's only been a few centuries
since we've actually, most of us, thought of our planet as spherical. When we first saw
these images in the 1960s, the world was changing at an incredible rate. In my own little
discipline of human geography, a cartographer called Waldo Tobler was drawing new maps of
the planet, and these maps have now spread, and I'm going to show you one of them now.
This map is a map of the world, but it's a map which looks to you a little bit
strange.

It's a map in which we stretched places, so that those areas which contain many people are
drawn larger, and those areas, like the Sahara and the Himalayas, in which there are few
people, have been shrunk away. Everybody on the planet is given an equal amount of space.
The cities are shown shining bright. The lines are showing you submarine cables and trade
routes. And there's one particular line that goes from the Chinese port of Dalian through
past Singapore, through the Suez Canal, through the Mediterranean and round to Rotterdam.
And it's showing you the route of what was the world's largest ship just a year ago, a
ship which was taking so many containers of goods that when they were unloaded, if the
lorries had all gone in convoy, they would have been 100 kilometers long. This is how our
world is now connected. This is the quantity of stuff we are now moving around the world,
just on one ship, on one voyage, in five weeks. We've lived in cities for a very long time,
but most of us didn't live in cities.

This is Çatalhöyük, one of the world's first cities. At its peak 9,000 years ago, people
had to walk over the roofs of others' houses to get to their home. If you look carefully
at the map of the city, you'll see it has no streets, because streets are something we
invented. The world changes. It changes by trial and error. We work out slowly and
gradually how to live in better ways. And the world has changed incredibly quickly most
recently. It's only within the last six, seven, or eight generations that we have actually
realized that we are a species. It's only within the last few decades that a map like this
could be drawn. Again, the underlying map is the map of world population, but over it,
you're seeing arrows showing how we spread out of Africa with dates showing you where we
think we arrived at particular times. I have to redraw this map every few months, because
somebody makes a discovery that a particular date was wrong. We are learning about
ourselves at an incredible speed.

And we're changing. A lot of change is gradual. It's accretion. We don't notice the change
because we only have short lives, 70, 80, if you're lucky 90 years. This graph is showing
you the annual rate of population growth in the world. It was very low until around about
1850, and then the rate of population growth began to rise so that around the time I was
born, when we first saw those images from the moon of our planet, our global population
was growing at two percent a year. If it had carried on growing at two percent a year for
just another couple of centuries, the entire planet would be covered with a seething mass
of human bodies all touching each other. And people were scared. They were scared of
population growth and what they called "the population bomb" in 1968. But then, if you
look at the end of the graph, the growth began to slow. The decade — the '70s, the '80s,
the '90s, the noughties, and in this decade, even faster — our population growth is
slowing.

Our planet is stabilizing. We are heading towards nine, 10, or 11 billion people by the
end of the century. Within that change, you can see tumult. You can see the Second World
War. You can see the pandemic in 1918 from influenza. You can see the great Chinese
famine. These are the events we tend to concentrate on. We tend to concentrate on the
terrible events in the news. We don't tend to concentrate on the gradual change and the
good news stories. We worry about people. We worry about how many people there are. We
worry about how you can get away from people. But this is the map of the world changed
again to make area large, the further away people are from each area. So if you want to
know where to go to get away from everybody, here's the best places to go. And every year,
these areas get bigger, because every year, we are coming off the land globally. We are
moving into the cities. We are packing in more densely.

There are wolves again in Europe, and the wolves are moving west across the continent. Our
world is changing. You have worries. This is a map showing where the water falls on our
planet. We now know that. And you can look at where Çatalhöyük was, where three continents
meet, Africa, Asia, and Europe, and you can see there are a large number of people living
there in areas with very little water. And you can see areas in which there is a great
deal of rainfall as well. And we can get a bit more sophisticated. Instead of making the
map be shaped by people, we can shape the map by water, and then we can change it every
month to show the amount of water falling on every small part of the globe. And you see
the monsoons moving around the planet, and the planet almost appears to have a heartbeat.
And all of this only became possible within my lifetime to see this is where we are
living. We have enough water. This is a map of where we grow our food in the
world.

This is the areas that we will rely on most for rice and maize and corn. People worry that
there won't be enough food, but we know, if we just ate less meat and fed less of the
crops to animals, there is enough food for everybody as long as we think of ourselves as
one group of people. And we also know about what we do so terribly badly nowadays. You will
have seen this map of the world before. This is the map produced by taking satellite
images, if you remember those satellites around the planet in the very first slide I
showed, and producing an image of what the Earth looks like at night. When you normally
see that map, on a normal map, the kind of map that most of you will be used to, you think
you are seeing a map of where people live. Where the lights are shining up is where people
live. But here, on this image of the world, remember we've stretched the map again.
Everywhere has the same density of people on this map.

If an area doesn't have people, we've shrunk it away to make it disappear. So we're
showing everybody with equal prominence. Now, the lights no longer show you where people
are, because people are everywhere. Now the lights on the map, the lights in London, the
lights in Cairo, the lights in Tokyo, the lights on the Eastern Seaboard of the United
States, the lights show you where people live who are so profligate with energy that they
can afford to spend money powering lights to shine up into the sky, so satellites can draw
an image like this. And the areas that are dark on the map are either areas where people
do not have access to that much energy, or areas where people do, but they have learned to
stop shining the light up into the sky. And if I could show you this map animated over
time, you would see that Tokyo has actually become darker, because ever since the tsunami
in Japan, Japan has had to rely on a quarter less electricity because it turned the
nuclear power stations off.

And the world didn't end. You just shone less light up into the sky. There are a huge
number of good news stories in the world. Infant mortality is falling and has been falling
at an incredible rate. A few years ago, the number of babies dying in their first year of
life in the world fell by five percent in just one year. More children are going to school
and learning to read and write and getting connected to the Internet and going on to go to
university than ever before at an incredible rate, and the highest number of young people
going to university in the world are women, not men. I can give you good news story after
good news story about what is getting better in the planet, but we tend to concentrate on
the bad news that is immediate. Rebecca Solnit, I think, put it brilliantly, when she
explained: "The accretion of incremental, imperceptible changes which can constitute
progress and which render our era dramatically different from the past" — the past was
much more stable — "a contrast obscured by the undramatic nature of gradual
transformation, punctuated by occasional tumult." Occasionally, terrible things
happen.

You are shown those terrible things on the news every night of the week. You are not told
about the population slowing down. You are not told about the world becoming more
connected. You are not told about the incredible improvements in understanding. You are
not told about how we are learning to begin to waste less and consume less. This is my last
map. On this map, we have taken the seas and the oceans out. Now you are just looking at
about 7.4 billion people with the map drawn in proportion to those people. You're looking
at over a billion in China, and you can see the largest city in the world in China, but
you do not know its name. You can see that India is in the center of this world. You can
see that Europe is on the edge. And we in Exeter today are on the far edge of the planet.
We are on a tiny scrap of rock off Europe which contains less than one percent of the
world's adults, and less than half a percent of the world's children.

We are living in a stabilizing world, an urbanizing world, an aging world, a connecting
world. There are many, many things to be frightened about, but there is no need for us to
fear each other as much as we do, and we need to see that we are now living in a new
world. Thank you very much.

<!--
ad_duration=3.33
comment_count=51
event="TEDxExeter"
external_start_time=0
has_talk_citation=1
intro_duration=11.82
is_subtitle_required="False"
is_talk_featured="True"
language="en"
language_swap="False"
native_language="en"
number_of_related_talks=6
number_of_speakers=1
number_of_subtitled_videos=25
number_of_tags=8
number_of_talk_download_languages=25
number_of_talk_more_resources=0
number_of_talk_recommendations=1
number_of_talks_take_actions=0
post_ad_duration=0.83
published_timestamp="2016-11-30 16:06:37"
recording_date="2016-04-15"
speaker_description="Social geographer"
speaker_is_published=1
speaker_name="Danny Dorling"
talk_more_resources=[]
talk_name="Maps that show us who we are (not just where we are)"
talk_recommendations_blurb="Check out these resources, curated by Danny Dorling."
talks_tags=["map","global-development","data","humanity","economics","population","visualizations","tedx"]
talks_take_action=[]
url_audio="https://download.ted.com/talks/DannyDorling_2016X.mp3?apikey=acme-roadrunner"
url_photo_speaker="https://pe.tedcdn.com/images/ted/257227a377e1d918bd31e498b05ac304faa813e6_254x191.jpg"
url_photo_talk="https://s3.amazonaws.com/talkstar-photos/uploads/ba7ac44f-4979-49a0-bcef-7c1fd3b08465/DannyDorling_2016X-embed.jpg"
url_webpage="https://www.ted.com/talks/danny_dorling_maps_that_show_us_who_we_are_not_just_where_we_are"
video_type_name="TEDx Talk"
-->