---
title: How we could change the planet's climate future
speaker: David Wallace-Wells
description: >-
 The climate crisis is too vast and complicated to solve with a silver bullet,
 says author David Wallace-Wells. What we need is a shift in how we live. Follow
 along as he lays out some of the dramatic actions we could take to build a
 livable, prosperous world in the age of global warming.
date: 2019-09-24
tags: ["climate-change","sustainability","environment","anthropocene","future","science","social-change","society"]
slug: david_wallace_wells_how_we_could_change_the_planet_s_climate_future
---

I'm here to talk about climate change, but I'm not really an environmentalist. In fact,
I've never really thought of myself as a nature person. I have never gone camping, never
gone hiking, never even owned a pet. I've lived my whole life in cities, actually just one
city. And while I like to take trips to visit nature, I always thought it was something
that was happening elsewhere, far away, with all of modern life a fortress against its
forces. In other words, like just about everybody I knew, I lived my life complacent and
deluded about the threat from global warming. Which I took to be happening slowly,
happening at a distance and representing only a modest threat to the way that I lived. In
each of these ways, I was very, very wrong. Now most people, if they were telling you about
climate change, will tell you a story about the future. If I was doing that, I would say,
"According to the UN, if we don't change course, by the end of the century, we're likely
to get about four degrees Celsius of warming." That would mean, some scientists believe,
twice as much war, half as much food, a global GDP possibly 20 percent smaller than it
would be without climate change.

That's an impact that's deeper than the Great Depression, and it would be permanent. But
the impacts are actually happening a lot faster than 2100. By just 2050, it's estimated,
many of the biggest cities in South Asia and the Middle East will be almost literally
unlivably hot in summer. These are cities that today are home to 10, 12, 15 million
people. And in just three decades, you wouldn't be able to walk around outside in them
without risking heatstroke or possibly death. The planet is now 1.1 degrees Celsius warmer
than it was before industrialization. That may not sound like a lot, but it actually puts
us entirely outside the window of temperatures that enclose all of human history. That
means that everything we have ever known as a species, the evolution of the human animal,
the development of agriculture, the development of rudimentary civilization and modern
civilization and industrial civilization, everything we know about ourselves as biological
creatures, as social creatures, as political creatures, all of it is the result of climate
conditions we have already left behind.

It's like we've landed on an entirely different planet, with an entirely different
climate. And we now have to figure out what of the civilization that we've brought with us
can endure these new conditions and what can't. And things will get worse from here. Now
for a very long time, we were told that climate change was a slow saga. It started with
the industrial revolution, and it had fallen to us to clean up the mess left by our
grandparents so our grandchildren wouldn't be dealing with the results. It was a story of
centuries. In fact, half of all of the emissions that have ever been produced from the
burning of fossil fuels in the entire history of humanity have been produced in just the
last 30 years. That's since Al Gore published his first book on warming. It's since the UN
established its IPCC climate change body. We've done more damage since then than in all
the centuries, all the millennia before. Now I'm 37 years old, which means my life contains
this entire story.

When I was born, the planet's climate seemed stable. Today, we are on the brink of
catastrophe. The climate crisis is not the legacy of our ancestors. It is the work of a
single generation. Ours. This may all sound like bad news. Which it is, really bad news.
But it also contains, I think, some good news, at least relatively speaking. These impacts
are terrifyingly large. But they are also, I think, exhilarating. Because they are
ultimately a reflection of how much power we have over the climate. If we get to those
hellish scenarios, it will be because we have made them happen, because we have chosen to
make them happen. Which means we can choose to make other scenarios happen, too. Now that
may seem too rosy to believe and the political obstacles are in fact enormous. But it is a
simple fact — the main driver of global warming is human action: How much carbon we put
into the atmosphere. Our hands are on those levers. And we can write the story of the
planet's climate future ourselves.

Not just can — but are. Since inaction is a kind of action, we'll be writing that story
ourselves whether we like it or not. This is not just any story, all of us holding the
future of the planet in our hands. It's the kind of story we used to recognize only in
mythology and theology. A single generation that has brought the future of humanity into
doubt now tasked with securing a new future. So what would that look like? It could mean
solar arrays barnacling the planet, really everywhere you looked. It could mean if we
developed better technology, we wouldn't even need to deploy them that broadly, because
it's been estimated that just a sliver of the Sahara desert absorbs enough solar power to
provide all the world's energy needs. But we'd probably need a new electric grid, one that
doesn't lose two-thirds of its power to waste heat, as is today the case in the US. We
could use some more nuclear power, perhaps, although it would have to be an entirely
different kind of nuclear power, because today's technology simply isn't cost-competitive
with renewable energy whose costs are falling so rapidly. We'd need a new kind of plane,
because I don't think it's particularly practical to ask the entire world to give up on
air travel, especially as so much of the global South is, for the very first time, able to
afford it.

We need planes that won't produce carbon. We need a new kind of agriculture. Because we
probably can't ask people to entirely give up on meat and go vegan, it would mean a new
way of raising beef. Or perhaps an old way, since we already know that traditional
pasturing practices can turn cattle farms from what are called carbon sources, which
produce CO2, into carbon sinks, which absorb them. If you prefer a techno solution, maybe
we can grow some of that mean in the lab. Probably, we could also feed some real cattle
seaweed, because that cuts their methane emissions by as much as 95 or 99
percent. Probably, we'd have to do all of these things, because as with every aspect of
this puzzle, the problem is simply too vast and complicated to solve in any single
silver-bullet way. And no matter how many solutions we deploy, we probably won't be able to
decarbonize in time. That's the terrifying math that we face. We won't be able to beat
climate change, only live with it and limit it.

And that means we'd probably need some amount of what are called negative emissions, which
take carbon out of the atmosphere as well. Billions of new trees, maybe trillions of new
trees. And whole plantations of carbon-capture machines. Perhaps an industry twice or four
times the size of today's oil and gas business to undo the damage that was done by those
businesses in past decades. We would need a new kind of infrastructure, poured by a
different kind of cement, because today, if cement were a country, it would be the world's
third biggest emitter. And China is pouring as much cement every three years as the US
poured in the entire 20th century. We would need to build seawalls and levees to protect
those people living on the coast, many of whom are too poor to build them today, which is
why it must mean an end to a narrowly nationalistic geopolitics that allows us to define
the suffering of those living elsewhere in the world as insignificant, when we even
acknowledge it. This better future won't be easy.

But the only obstacles are human ones. That may not be much of a comfort, if you know what
I know about human brutality and indifference, but I promise you, it is better than the
alternative. Science isn't stopping us from taking action, and neither is technology. We
have the tools we need today to begin. Of course, we also have the tools we need to end
global poverty, epidemic disease and the abuse of women as well. Which is why more than
new tools, we need a new politics, a way of overcoming all those human obstacles — our
culture, our economics, our status quo bias, our disinterest in taking seriously anything
that really scares us. Our shortsightedness. Our sense of self-interest. And the
selfishness of the world's rich and powerful who have the least incentive to change
anything. Now, they will suffer too, but not as much as those with the least, who have
done the least to produce warming and have benefited the least from the processes that
have brought us to this crisis point but will be burdened most in the decades
ahead.

A new politics would make the matter of managing that burden, where it falls and how
heavily, the top priority of our time. No matter what we do, climate change will transform
modern life. Some amount of warming is already baked in and is inevitable, which means
probably some amount of additional suffering is, too. And even if we take dramatic action
and avoid some of these truly terrifying worst-case scenarios, it would mean living on an
entirely different planet. With a new politics, a new economics, a new relationship to
technology and a new relationship to nature — a whole new world. But a relatively livable
one. Relatively prosperous. And green. Why not choose that one? Thank you.

<!--
ad_duration=3.33
comment_count=14
event="We the Future"
external_duration=0
external_start_time=0
has_talk_citation=1
intro_duration=11.82
is_subtitle_required="False"
is_talk_featured="True"
language="en"
language_swap="False"
native_language="en"
number_of_related_talks=6
number_of_speakers=1
number_of_subtitled_videos=18
number_of_tags=8
number_of_talk_download_languages=19
number_of_talk_more_resources=1
number_of_talk_recommendations=0
number_of_talks_take_actions=0
post_ad_duration=0.83
published_timestamp="2020-03-13 19:09:40"
recording_date="2019-09-24"
speaker_description="Journalist"
speaker_is_published=1
speaker_name="David Wallace-Wells"
talk_name="How we could change the planet's climate future"
talks_tags=["climate-change","sustainability","environment","anthropocene","future","science","social-change","society"]
talks_take_action=[]
url_audio="https://download.ted.com/talks/DavidWallaceWells_2019S.mp3?apikey=acme-roadrunner"
url_photo_speaker="https://pe.tedcdn.com/images/ted/4820380f94b2761ab9758d90de9da51c2b8c7471_254x191.jpg"
url_photo_talk="https://s3.amazonaws.com/talkstar-photos/uploads/e767b59e-5512-446d-9708-1bc449ef8206/DavidWallace-Wells_2019S-embed.jpg"
url_webpage="https://www.ted.com/talks/david_wallace_wells_how_we_could_change_the_planet_s_climate_future"
video_type_name="TED Salon Talk (partner)"
-->