---
title: What we do (and don't) know about the coronavirus
speaker: David Heymann
description: >-
 What happens if you get infected with the coronavirus? Who's most at risk? How
 can you protect yourself? Public health expert David Heymann, who led the global
 response to the SARS outbreak in 2003, shares the latest findings about COVID-19
 and what the future may hold. (Recorded February 27, 2020)
date: 2020-02-27
tags: ["pandemic","health","public-health","global-issues","illness","disease","vaccines","virus","coronavirus"]
slug: david_heymann_what_we_do_and_don_t_know_about_the_coronavirus
---

[As of the morning February 27, 2020, there were at least 82,000 confirmed cases worldwide
of the coronavirus and 2,810 deaths from it. TED invited Dr. David Heymann to share the
latest findings about the outbreak.][What happens if you get infected with the
coronavirus?]This looks like a very mild disease, like a common cold, in the majority of
people. There are certain people who get infected and have very serious illness; among
them are health workers. It's a very serious infection in them, as they get a higher dose
than normal people, and at the same time, they have no immunity. So in the general
population, it's likely that the dose of virus that you receive when you are infected is
much less than the dose that a health worker would receive, health workers having more
serious infections. So your infection would be less serious, hopefully. So that leaves the
elderly and those with comorbidities to really be the ones that we have to make sure are
taken care of in hospitals.[Who are the people who should be most concerned about
this?]Well, the most concerned are people who are, first of all, in developing countries
and who don't have access to good medical care and may not have access at all to a
hospital, should an epidemic occur in their country.

Those people would be at great risk, especially the elderly. Elderly in all populations
are at risk, but especially those who can't get to oxygen. In industrialized countries,
it's the very elderly who have comorbidities, who have diabetes, who have other diseases,
who are at risk. The general population doesn't appear to be at great risk.[What
pre-existing medical conditions put people at higher risk?]First of all, pulmonary disease
existing as a comorbidity is also important. In general, the elderly are at greater risk,
especially those over 70, because their immune systems are not as effective as they might
have once been, and they are more susceptible to infections. In addition, in some
instances in China, there's been a coinfection with influenza and at the same time, there
have been some bacterial superinfections on the pneumonias that are occurring.[Where can
we find up-to-date information?]The Center for Disease Control in Atlanta keeps track and
has updates on a regular basis on its website.

Also, the World Health Organization in Geneva, which is coordinating many of the
activities going on internationally, also has a website with daily updates. It's our
responsibility to get that information as individuals, so we understand and can make sure
that we can contribute in our own way to prevention of major spread.[You led the global
response to the SARS outbreak in 2003. How does this outbreak compare?]That's the same
problem with all new infections. This is an infection that's coming to humans who have
never been exposed to this virus before. They don't have any antibody protection, and it's
not clear whether their immune system can handle this virus or not. This is a virus that
usually finds itself in bats or in other animals, and all of a sudden, it's in humans. And
humans just don't have experience with this virus. But gradually, we are beginning to
learn a lot, as we did with SARS. And you know, there are certainly a larger number of
deaths than there were with SARS.

But when you divide that by a denominator of persons who are infected, there are many,
many more persons infected than there were with SARS. The case fatality ratio, that is the
ratio of deaths to the numbers of cases in SARS, was about 10 percent. With the current
coronavirus, COVID-19, it is two percent or probably less. So it's a much less virulent
virus, but it's still a virus that causes mortality, and that's what we don't want
entering human populations.[Have we responded adequately at border crossings, such as
airports?]It's clearly understood that airports or any land borders cannot prevent a
disease from entering. People in the incubation period can cross that border, can enter
countries and can then infect others when they become sick. So borders are not a means of
preventing infections from entering a country by checking temperatures. Borders are
important because you can provide to people arriving from areas that might be at risk of
having had infection, provide them with an understanding, either a printed understanding
or a verbal understanding, of what the signs and symptoms are of this infection, and what
they should do if they feel that they might be infected.[What's the timeline for a
vaccine?]Vaccines are under development right now, there's a lot of research going
on.

That research requires first that the vaccine be developed, then that it be studied for
safety and effectiveness in animals, who are challenged with the virus after they are
vaccinated, and then it must go into human studies. The animal studies have not yet begun,
but will soon begin for certain vaccines. And it's thought that by the end of the year, or
early next year, there may be some candidate vaccines that can then be studied for
licensing by regulatory agencies. So we're talking about at least a year until there's
vaccine available that can be used in many populations.[What questions about the outbreak
are still unanswered?]It's clear we know how it transmits, we don't know how easily it
transmits in humans, in communities or in unenclosed areas. We know, for example, that in
the enclosed area of a cruise ship, it spread very easily. We need to better understand
how it will spread once it gets into more open areas where people are exposed to people
who might be sick.[What about the global response could be improved?]A major problem in
the world today is that we look at outbreaks in developing countries as something that we
need to go and stop.

So when there's an outbreak of Ebola, we think "How can we go and stop this outbreak in
the country?" We don't think about "How can we help that country strengthen its capacity,
so that it can detect and respond to infections?" So we haven't invested enough in helping
countries develop their core capacity in public health. What we've done is invested in
many mechanisms globally, which can provide support to other countries to go and help stop
outbreaks. But we want to see a world where every country can do its best to stop its own
outbreaks.[Will we see more emerging disease outbreaks in the future?]Today, there are
over seven billion people. And when those people come into the world, they demand more
food, they demand a whole series of things and they live closer together. In fact, we're
an urban world, where people live in urban areas. And at the same time, we're growing more
animals, and those animals are contributing food to humans as well.

So what we see is that that animal-human interface is becoming closer and closer together.
And this intensive agriculture of animals and this intensive increase in human populations
living together on the same planet is really a melting pot where outbreaks can occur and
do occur. We will eventually have more and more of these outbreaks. So an emerging
infection today is just a warning of what will happen in the future. We have to make sure
that that technical collaboration in the world is there to work together to make sure that
we can understand these outbreaks when they occur and rapidly provide the information
necessary to control them.[Is the worst behind us?]I can't predict with accuracy. So all I
can say is that we must all be prepared for the worst-case scenario. And at the same time,
learn how we can protect ourselves and protect others should we become a part of that
epidemic.[To learn more, visit: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention World Health
Organization]

<!--
ad_duration=3.33
comment_count=47
event="Currently"
external_duration=0
external_start_time=0
has_talk_citation=1
intro_duration=11.82
is_subtitle_required="False"
is_talk_featured="True"
language="en"
language_swap="False"
native_language="en"
number_of_related_talks=6
number_of_speakers=1
number_of_subtitled_videos=32
number_of_tags=9
number_of_talk_download_languages=33
number_of_talk_more_resources=0
number_of_talk_recommendations=0
number_of_talks_take_actions=2
post_ad_duration=0.83
published_timestamp="2020-03-03 20:48:02"
recording_date="2020-02-27"
speaker_description="Epidemiologist, professor"
speaker_is_published=1
speaker_name="David Heymann"
talk_more_resources=[]
talk_name="What we do (and don't) know about the coronavirus"
talks_tags=["pandemic","health","public-health","global-issues","illness","disease","vaccines","virus","coronavirus"]
url_photo_speaker="https://pe.tedcdn.com/images/ted/f68df18bba47824667ef4d1158f9ef4e7cb8bf87_254x191.jpg"
url_photo_talk="https://s3.amazonaws.com/talkstar-photos/uploads/6bc05f8d-8c87-44a7-b12f-663ff3c34c6d/DavidHeymann_2020S-embed.jpg"
url_webpage="https://www.ted.com/talks/david_heymann_what_we_do_and_don_t_know_about_the_coronavirus"
video_type_name="TED Stage Talk"
-->