---
title: How urban agriculture is transforming Detroit
speaker: Devita Davison
description: >-
 There's something amazing growing in the city of Detroit: healthy, accessible,
 delicious, fresh food. In a spirited talk, fearless farmer Devita Davison
 explains how features of Detroit's decay actually make it an ideal spot for urban
 agriculture. Join Davison for a walk through neighborhoods in transformation as
 she shares stories of opportunity and hope. "These aren't plots of land where
 we're just growing tomatoes and carrots," Davison says. "We're building social
 cohesion as well as providing healthy, fresh food."
date: 2017-04-24
tags: ["agriculture","community","culture","cities","garden","public-health","farming","society","food","personal-growth","urban"]
slug: devita_davison_how_urban_agriculture_is_transforming_detroit
---

I'm from Detroit.

A city that in the 1950s was the world's industrial giant, with a population of 1.8
million people and 140 square miles of land and infrastructure, used to support this
booming, Midwestern urban center. And now today, just a half a century later, Detroit is
the poster child for urban decay. Currently in Detroit, our population is under 700,000,
of which 84 percent are African American, and due to decades of disinvestment and capital
flight from the city into the suburbs, there is a scarcity in Detroit. There is a scarcity
of retail, more specifically, fresh food retail, resulting in a city where 70 percent of
Detroiters are obese and overweight, and they struggle. They struggle to access nutritious
food that they need, that they need to stay healthy, that they need to prevent premature
illness and diet-related diseases. Far too many Detroiters live closer to a fast food
restaurant or to a convenience store, or to a gas station where they have to shop for food
than they do a full-service supermarket.

And this is not good news about the city of Detroit, but this is the news and the story
that Detroiters intend to change. No, I'm going to take that back. This is the story that
Detroiters are changing, through urban agriculture and food entrepreneurship. Here's the
thing: because of Detroit's recent history, it now finds itself with some very unique
assets, open land being one of them. Experts say that the entire cities of Boston, San
Francisco, and the borough of Manhattan will fit in the land area of the city of Detroit.
They further go on to say that 40 square miles of the city is vacant. That's a quarter to
a third of the city, and with that level of emptiness, it creates a landscape unlike any
other big city. So Detroit has this — open land, fertile soil, proximity to water, willing
labor and a desperate demand for healthy, fresh food. All of this has created a
people-powered grassroots movement of people in Detroit who are transforming this city
from what was the capital of American industry into an agrarian paradise.

You know, I think, out of all the cities in the world, Detroit, Michigan, is best
positioned to serve as the world's urban exemplar of food security and sustainable
development. In Detroit, we have over 1,500, yes, 1,500 gardens and farms located all
across the city today. And these aren't plots of land where we're just growing tomatoes
and carrots either. You understand, urban agriculture in Detroit is all about community,
because we grow together. So these spaces are spaces of conviviality. These spaces are
places where we're building social cohesion as well as providing healthy, fresh food to
our friends, our families and our neighbors. Come walk with me. I want to take you through
a few Detroit neighborhoods, and I want you to see what it looks like when you empower
local leadership, and when you support grassroots movements of folks who are moving the
needle in low-income communities and people of color. Our first stop, Oakland Avenue
Farms.

Oakland Avenue Farms is located in Detroit's North End neighborhood. Oakland Avenue Farms
is transforming into a five-acre landscape combining art, architecture, sustainable
ecologies and new market practices. In the truest sense of the word, this is what
agriculture looks like in the city of Detroit. I've had the opportunity to work with
Oakland Avenue Farms in hosting Detroit-grown and made farm-to-table dinners. These are
dinners where we bring folks onto the farm, we give them plenty of time and opportunity to
meet and greet and talk to the grower, and then they're taken on a farm tour. And then
afterwards, they're treated to a farm-to-table meal prepared by a chef who showcases all
the produce on the farm right at the peak of its freshness. We do that. We bring people
onto the farm, we have folks sitting around a table, because we want to change people's
relationship to food. We want them to know exactly where their food comes from that is
grown on that farm that's on the plate. My second stop, I'm going to take you on the west
side of Detroit, to the Brightmoor neighborhood.

Now, Brightmoor is a lower-income community in Detroit. There's about 13,000 residents in
Brightmoor. They decided to take a block-by-block-by-block strategy. So within the
neighborhood of Brightmoor, you'll find a 21-block microneighborhood called Brightmoor
Farmway. Now, what was a notorious, unsafe, underserved community has transformed into a
welcoming, beautiful, safe farmway, lush with parks and gardens and farms and greenhouses.
This tight-knit community also came together recently, and they purchased an abandoned
building, an abandoned building that was in disrepair and in foreclosure. And with the
help of friends and families and volunteers, they were able to take down the bulletproof
glass, they were able to clean up the grounds and they transformed that building into a
community kitchen, into a cafe, into a storefront. Now the farmers and the food artisans
who live in Brightmoor, they have a place where they can make and sell their
product.

And the people in the community have some place where they can buy healthy, fresh
food. Urban agriculture — and this is my third example — can be used as a way to lift up
the business cooperative model. The 1,500 farms and gardens I told you about earlier? Keep
Growing Detroit is a nonprofit organization that had a lot to do with those farms. They
distributed last year 70,000 packets of seeds and a quarter of a million transplants, and
as a result of that last year, 550,000 pounds of produce was grown in the city of
Detroit.

But aside from all of that, they also manage and operate a cooperative. It's called Grown
in Detroit. It consists of about 70 farmers, small farmers. They all grow, and they sell
together. They grow fruits, they grow vegetables, they grow flowers, they grow herbs in
healthy soil, free of chemicals, pesticides, fertilizers, genetically modified products —
healthy food. And when their product is sold all over the city of Detroit in local
markets, they get a hundred percent of the proceeds from the sale. In a city like Detroit,
where far too many, far too many African Americans are dying as a result of diet-related
diseases, restaurants, they have a huge role to play in increasing healthy food access in
the city of Detroit, culturally appropriate restaurants. Enter Detroit Vegan Soul. Yes, we
have a vegan soul food restaurant in the city of Detroit.

Yes, yes. Detroit Vegan Soul is providing Detroiters the opportunity to eat more
plant-based meals and they've received an overwhelming response from Detroiters.
Detroiters are hungry for culturally appropriate, fresh, delicious food. That's why we
built a nonprofit organization called FoodLab Detroit, to help small neighborhood
burgeoning food entrepreneurs start and scale healthy food businesses. FoodLab provides
these entrepreneurs incubation, hands-on education, workshops, technical assistance,
access to industry experts so that they can grow and scale. They're very small businesses,
but last year, they had a combined revenue of over 7.5 million dollars, and they provided
252 jobs. Listen.

These are just a few examples on how you expand opportunities so that everybody can
participate and prosper, particularly those who come from neighborhoods that have been
historically excluded from these types of opportunities. I know, I know. My city is a long
way from succeeding. We're still struggling, and I'm not going to stand here on this stage
and tell you that all of Detroit's problems and all of Detroit's challenges are going to
be solved through urban agriculture. I'm not going to do that, but I will tell you this:
urban agriculture has Detroit thinking about its city now in a different way, a city that
can be both urban and rural. And yes, I know, these stories are small, these stories are
neighborhood-based stories, but these stories are powerful. They're powerful because I'm
showing you how we're creating a new society left vacant in the places and the spaces that
was disintegration from the old.

They're powerful stories because they're stories about love, the love that Detroiters have
for one another, the love that we have for our community, the love that we have for Mother
Earth, but more importantly, these stories are stories on how devastation, despair, decay
never ever get the last word in the city of Detroit. When hundreds of thousands of people
left Detroit, and they left us for dead, those who stayed had hope. They held on to hope.
They never gave up. They always kept fighting. And listen, I know, transforming a big city
like Detroit to one that is prosperous, one that's functional, one that's healthy, one
that's inclusive, one that provides opportunities for all, I know it's tough, I know it's
challenging, I know it's hard. But I just believe that if we start strengthening the
social fabric of our communities, and if we kickstart economic opportunities in our most
vulnerable neighborhoods, it all starts with healthy, accessible, delicious, culturally
appropriate food. Thank you very much.

Thank you.

<!--
ad_duration=3.33
comment_count=29
event="TED2017"
external_start_time=0
has_talk_citation=1
intro_duration=11.82
is_subtitle_required="False"
is_talk_featured="True"
language="en"
language_swap="False"
native_language="en"
number_of_related_talks=6
number_of_speakers=1
number_of_subtitled_videos=15
number_of_tags=11
number_of_talk_download_languages=15
number_of_talk_more_resources=0
number_of_talk_recommendations=1
number_of_talks_take_actions=2
post_ad_duration=0.83
published_timestamp="2017-12-07 20:56:19"
recording_date="2017-04-24"
speaker_description="Food activist"
speaker_is_published=1
speaker_name="Devita Davison"
talk_more_resources=[]
talk_name="How urban agriculture is transforming Detroit"
talk_recommendations_blurb="Reading recommendations curated by Devita Davison"
talks_tags=["agriculture","community","culture","cities","garden","public-health","farming","society","food","personal-growth","urban"]
url_audio="https://download.ted.com/talks/DevitaDavison_2017.mp3?apikey=acme-roadrunner"
url_photo_speaker="https://pe.tedcdn.com/images/ted/e0c600d766b81ecc1a4447433007dd69c61506ed_254x191.jpg"
url_photo_talk="https://s3.amazonaws.com/talkstar-photos/uploads/5f53b2b6-5764-4440-ac0b-36cd77659337/DevitaDavison_2017-embed.jpg"
url_webpage="https://www.ted.com/talks/devita_davison_how_urban_agriculture_is_transforming_detroit"
video_type_name="TED Stage Talk"
-->