---
title: The injustice of "policing for profit" -- and how to end it
speaker: Dick M. Carpenter II
description: >-
 Many countries have an active, centuries-old law that allows government agencies
 to take your things -- your house, your car, your business -- without ever
 convicting you of a crime. Law researcher Dick M. Carpenter II exposes how this
 practice of civil forfeiture threatens your rights and creates a huge monetary
 incentive for law enforcement to pocket your possessions -- and he lays out a
 path to end "policing for profit" once and for all.
date: 2019-06-22
tags: ["society","law","policy","justice-system","tedx"]
slug: dick_m_carpenter_ii_the_injustice_of_policing_for_profit_and_how_to_end_it
---

Picture yourself driving down the road tomorrow, heading somewhere to buy an item you
found on Craigslist, perhaps a nice mountain bike for 3,000 dollars. At that price, it's
probably one of those bikes with a little electric motor on it —

maybe some streamers from the handlebars.

The seller has declared this a cash-only deal, so you have, in the console of your car,
3,000 dollars. Suddenly, you are pulled over. During the stop, the officer asks, "Do you
have any drugs, weapons or large amounts of cash in your car?" You truthfully answer,
"Yes," not to the drugs or to the weapons, but to the cash. In the blink of an eye, you
are ordered out of your car. The officer searches it and finds your cash. On the spot, he
seizes it, and he says he suspects it's part of a drug crime. A few days later, the local
district attorney files paperwork to keep your money — permanently. And all of this
happens without you ever being charged or convicted of any crime. Now, you might be saying,
"Ah, this would never happen in the United States."

Incidents like this occur every day in our country. It's one of the most significant
threats to your property rights most people have never even heard of. It's called "civil
forfeiture." Most of you are generally aware of criminal forfeiture, although the term
itself might be a little unfamiliar, so let's begin with forfeiture. When we forfeit
something, we give up that thing, or we're forced to give it up. In criminal forfeiture,
someone is charged and convicted of a crime, and therefore, they have to give up property
related to that crime. For example, suppose you use your car to transport and deal drugs.
You're caught and convicted; now you have to give up or forfeit your car as part of the
sentencing. That's criminal forfeiture. But in civil forfeiture, no person is charged with
a crime — the property is charged and convicted of a crime.

You heard that correctly: the government actually convicts an inanimate object with a
crime. It's as if that thing itself committed the crime. That's why civil forfeiture cases
have these really peculiar names, like, "The United States of America v. One 1990 Ford
Thunderbird."

Or "The State of Oklahoma v. 53,234 Dollars in Cash."

Or my personal favorite: "The United States of America v. One Solid Gold Object in the
Form of a Rooster."

Now, you're thinking: How does something like this happen? That's exactly what I said when
I first learned about civil forfeiture while on a road trip with my wife. No, we did not
get pulled over.

I was reading about the history of civil forfeiture as part of my work as a research
director at the law firm, and I came across one of the cases I just mentioned, "The United
States of America v. One 1990 Ford Thunderbird." In that case, Carol Thomas loaned her car
to her son. While in the car, her son committed a minor drug crime. Carol didn't commit
any crime, so law enforcement couldn't convict her and take the car, but they could — and
did — use civil forfeiture to "convict the car" and take it. Carol was completely
innocent, but she lost her car nonetheless. In other words, she was punished for a crime
she did not commit. When I read this, I was gobsmacked. How could this occur? How is this
even legal? It turns out, it began in our country with maritime law. Early in our republic,
the government sought to fight piracy — yes, actual pirates. The problem was the
government often couldn't catch the pirates, so instead it used civil forfeiture to
convict the pirates' property and take it, and therefore deny the pirates their illegal
profits.

Of course, the government could've simply taken and kept the booty without necessarily
using civil forfeiture, but doing so would have violated our most basic due process and
property rights. Now, the government rarely used civil forfeiture until the 1980s and the
war on drugs. We expanded civil forfeiture law to cover drug crimes and then later, other
types of crime. Canada and the European Union adopted similar provisions so that now all
kinds of people are ensnared in the forfeiture web, people like Russ Caswell. Russ Caswell
owned a small budget motel in Tewksbury, Massachusetts. His father built the motel in
1955, and Russ took it over in the 1980s. During the years that Russ owned the motel, from
time to time, people would rent rooms, and they would commit drug crimes. Russ didn't
condone the activities — in fact, whenever he found out about it, he would immediately
call police. Russ was entirely innocent of any crime, but that did not stop the US
Department of Justice from seizing his motel simply because other people committed crimes
there. But Russ's case was not alone.

Between 1997 and 2016, the US Department of Justice took more than 635,000 properties.
This means each year, tens of thousands of people lose their properties in cases in which
they're never charged or convicted of any crime. And we're not necessarily talking about
major drug kingpins or headline-grabbing financial fraudsters whose cases involve hundreds
of thousands if not millions of dollars. Many of these seizures and forfeitures involve
just everyday people like Russ Caswell or you or me. But it gets worse. Are you wondering:
Where does all this cash and property end up? In most places, law enforcement keeps it.
And they use it to buy equipment or pay for building repairs or even pay salaries and
overtime. This is a clear conflict of interest. It creates a perverse profit incentive
that can distort law enforcement. And this is a problem that's not lost on those in law
enforcement, either.

Former chief of police in Rochester, Minnesota, Roger Peterson, described the choice that
police officers often face. As he described it: suppose I'm a police officer, and I see a
drug deal. Now I face a choice: Do I go after the buyer and remove from the street illegal
drugs, or do I go after the seller and get cash for my agency to use? So it's easy to see
why a police officer might go for the cash. It was just such a circumstance that compelled
police officers in Philadelphia to seize an entire house. In 2014, Chris and Markela
Sourovelis' son sold 40 dollars worth of drugs down the street from their house. Forty
dollars. The police watched the deal go down. They could've arrested the buyer and
confiscated the drugs, but they didn't. They could've arrested the Sourovelises' son right
there on the street and grabbed 40 dollars. But they didn't. They waited to arrest him at
home, because then they could seize their entire house. The house was worth 350,000
dollars.

That is what I mean by a perverse profit incentive. But the Sourovelises' case was no
outlier. Philadelphia, the "City of Brotherly Love," the "Athens of America," the "Cradle
of Liberty," birthplace to the Constitution, home to the Liberty Bell and Independence
Hall, the "City that Loves you Back" —

that Philadelphia was running a forfeiture machine. Between 2002 and 2016, Philadelphia
took more than 77 million dollars through forfeiture, including 1,200 homes. Cars,
jewelry, electronics — all of it they sold, the proceeds they kept. And they would have
kept right on doing it, had it not been for a class-action lawsuit — our team's
class-action lawsuit —(Applause and cheers)Thank you. We forced them to change their
forfeiture practices and to compensate victims.(Applause and cheers)When our team first
began researching forfeiture in 2007, we had no idea how much forfeiture revenue there
was. In fact, no one knew. It wasn't until our groundbreaking study, "Policing for
Profit," that we found federal law enforcement agencies have taken in almost 40 billion
dollars — billion with a B — since 2001, more than 80 percent of that through civil
forfeiture. Unfortunately, we have no idea how much state and local agencies have taken
in, because in many states, they don't have to report it. So until we reform forfeiture,
we'll never know how much forfeiture activity actually occurs in the United
States.

And we desperately need reform. Legislatures should abolish civil forfeiture and replace
it with criminal forfeiture. And all forfeiture proceeds should go to a neutral fund such
as a general fund. When forfeiture proceeds stop hitting law enforcement budgets directly,
that is when we will end policing for profit.

Now, as you can imagine, law enforcement officials don't love these recommendations.

They stand to lose a lot of money, and they believe civil forfeiture is an effective
crime-fighting tool. The trouble is, it's not. In June 2019, we released a study that
found forfeiture does not improve crime-fighting. And the report also found that law
enforcement agencies pursue more forfeiture money during economic downturns. So when city
and county budgets are tight, law enforcement will use forfeiture to find the money. So
it's no wonder, then, that law enforcement officials predict a criminal apocalypse
—

if these reforms are adopted. But some states have already implemented them, and we're
pushing for reform all across the country, because until we reform forfeiture, this is
something that could happen to any of us. It can happen in the United States, it can
happen in the United Kingdom, it can happen in countries throughout the European Union and
beyond. People like you and me and the Sourovelises and Russ Caswell, just doing the
everyday stuff of life, can be caught in a scheme we never thought possible. It is time we
end policing for profit once and for all. Thank you.(Applause and cheers)

<!--
ad_duration=3.33
comment_count=13
event="TEDxMileHigh"
external_duration=0
external_start_time=0
has_talk_citation=1
intro_duration=11.82
is_subtitle_required="False"
is_talk_featured="True"
language="en"
language_swap="False"
native_language="en"
number_of_related_talks=6
number_of_speakers=1
number_of_subtitled_videos=7
number_of_tags=5
number_of_talk_download_languages=7
number_of_talk_more_resources=0
number_of_talk_recommendations=1
number_of_talks_take_actions=1
post_ad_duration=0.83
published_timestamp="2020-04-28 15:12:24"
recording_date="2019-06-22"
speaker_description="Law researcher"
speaker_is_published=1
speaker_name="Dick M. Carpenter II"
talk_more_resources=[]
talk_name="The injustice of \"policing for profit\" -- and how to end it"
talk_recommendations_blurb="More resources curated by Dick M. Carpenter II"
talks_tags=["society","law","policy","justice-system","tedx"]
url_audio="https://download.ted.com/talks/DickCarpenter_2019X.mp3?apikey=acme-roadrunner"
url_photo_speaker="https://pe.tedcdn.com/images/ted/ea01322a957d940d2b83a28c8c78f040f9f454cb_254x191.jpg"
url_photo_talk="https://s3.amazonaws.com/talkstar-photos/uploads/20736b4f-91ec-4016-86e6-965bb944e07d/DickCarpenter_2019x-embed.jpg"
url_webpage="https://www.ted.com/talks/dick_m_carpenter_ii_the_injustice_of_policing_for_profit_and_how_to_end_it"
video_type_name="TEDx Talk"
-->