---
title: How volumetric video brings a new dimension to filmmaking
speaker: Diego Prilusky
description: >-
 In this talk and tech demo, filmmaker Diego Prilusky introduces the next chapter
 in moviemaking: volumetric video, a 360-degree experience powered by hundreds of
 cameras that capture light and motion from every angle. Check out how this
 technology creates a new type of immersive storytelling -- and catch Prilusky's
 reshoot of an iconic dance number from "Grease" captured with volumetric
 video.
date: 2019-07-20
tags: ["entertainment","film","movies","technology","creativity","innovation","media"]
slug: diego_prilusky_how_volumetric_video_brings_a_new_dimension_to_filmmaking
---

I love making movies. Motion pictures have been in existence for more than a hundred
years. Filmmaking hasn't changed for the dimensional mindset. Placing the camera in a
scene and pressing "record" hasn't changed. Filmmaking is still a frontal experience, and
creating the film has the possibility to follow the same direction of the content
creation. We still stand in front of a flat image, watching the fiction. There's nothing
wrong with it. I love watching movies and going to the theaters. The experiences can be
such emotional experiences. The art and craft of emotional experiences within a frame can
be so strong to drive a stronger emotion. The question we're asking is, How the experience
of motion pictures can exist beyond the flat screen. How can we start creating content for
the next generation of content experiences? Traditionally, when we imagine a scene, we look
at the frame and the composition.

We have to think about how we create depth and parallax using foreground, background
elements as the camera moves. With the technology today and devices of VR glasses, AR
glasses, smart devices, allowing three-dimensional and full navigation in space, we have
the possibility to enable audiences to experience content from multiple perspectives. What
we have to think about is how we take this technology, all the capabilities, and enable
the experience to move farther away inside the scene. Now we're not talking about video
games or computer-generated actors, which look tremendously realistic. We're talking about
real actors and real performance, performing onstage. We have to start thinking how we
capture the actors and how we capture the real scene in order to immerse inside. Now, we're
familiar with the 360-degree video, where you place a camera inside the scene and you can
create this beautiful panoramic image all around you, but from the same aspect, filmmaking
is still frontal.

In order to emerge fully inside the scene, we will need to capture the light from all the
possible directions. We will have to surround the scene with an enormous amount of
sensors, with all possible capabilities to capture the light and enable us to emerge
inside afterwards again. Now, in this setup, there's no more foreground or background or a
camera placed in space but hundreds of sensors capturing the light and capturing the
motion from all the possible directions. With the new technological advancements, we can
start looking at 3D photography, capturing the light from multiple perspectives, enabling
us to reconstruct the object. This is like photography in 3D space. Now, with these
technological advancements, we can record video not just as a flat image but as a volume.
This is what we call "volumetric video," and it has the capability to record every action
of the scene as a full three-dimensional volume. Now, what is a voxel?

A voxel is like a three-dimensional pixel, but instead of being a flat image square,
staying light and colored, it's like a three-dimensional cube in space, with x, y, and z
positions. This enables us to create a full capture of the scene from any perspective. Now
this renders a fully light-immersive scene from multiple perspectives. This capability
requires an insane amount of information to be processed. We will have to capture the
light from an enormous amount of cameras to create this information. Now, in order to do
such a thing, we would need a setup that would host a numerous amount of cameras installed
in a stage and a stage big enough in order to fit a full cinematic experience. Now that
sounds like a crazy idea, but that's exactly what we did. For the last three years, we
have been building a huge volumetric camera chamber. It's 10,000 square feet of a stage,
enabling to capture the action from any location.

We have deployed hundreds of cameras, sending a tremendous amount of information to a huge
data center powered by Intel supercomputers. The ability to have this 10,000 feet enables
us to fit any kind of action, any kind of performance. It is the size of an average
Broadway stage. We call it Intel Studios, and it's the largest volumetric stage in the
world, with the objective of enabling and exploring the next generation of this immersive
media filmmaking. Now, to test these ideas, we were thinking about what we can do as the
first scene to try it out. So we chose the Western scene. We brought horses, set
designers, dirt, everything needed to create the full scene of a Western. But this time,
there was no camera inside. There was nothing really moving besides all the cameras
installed outside. The challenge of the actors was tremendous. They have to perform a
flawless action visible from all the directions. There's no possibility to hide a punch or
not show the action.

Everything is captured and everything is seen. The output of the capture — this is our
future capture — opened our eyes for the immense capabilities. It was like a full 3D scan
of the entire scene. We were able to move around and travel in the space. The thing about
this, it's not anymore about perceiving the light emitted from a screen but now traveling
inside the light, traveling inside the scene. This obviously opens possibilities for an
enormous amount of storytelling and methodologies of creation. This is the possibilities
of your personal narrative, the possibility of creating your own story inside, or maybe
following other stories. Let's take a look at one of the last renders and
see.

What you're seeing here is full volumetric video, and there's no physical camera in the
scene.

We have the full control(Music, sounds of combat)of space and time.(Music, sounds of
combat)Now, again, no physical camera was here. Everything was captured surrounding. Now,
this is very nice, but what if we wanted to see the scene, maybe, from the eyes of the
horse? Well, we can do that as well.(Horse galloping)So what you're seeing right now is
the same action, but this time, we're watching exactly from the eyes of the horse. The
possibilities are, well, unlimited.

Thank you.

So this is all great for creators and storytellers. It really opens a huge canvas for a
different type of storytelling and moviemaking. But what about the audience? How can the
audience experience this differently? In order to [create] our explorations, we partnered
with Paramount Pictures in order to explore immersive media in a Hollywood movie
production. Together with the director Randal Kleiser, we reimagined the iconic movie of
1978, "Grease." Some of you know it, some of you don't. A 40-year-old movie, amazing
experience. And our goal was really to look at how we can take this iconic action and
dance and bring it deeper into the experience, bring it deeper into the audience. Imagine
that you can not just watch the movie but get inside it and dance with the actors and
dance with the performance. Now we're breaking, really, the traditional 2D mindset of
thinking, and bringing a much richer possibility of moviemaking and content creation. But
why watch it on the screen?

Let's try to bring these actors here on the stage. So they're not going to really come —
I'm going to use an iPad.

Sorry. I'm going to use an iPad in order to bring in augmented reality. Now, obviously,
these devices have their own limitations in terms of the data-computing process, so we
have to reduce the amount of resolution. So what I'm doing now, I'm placing here a marker,
so I'll be able to position exactly where I want everyone to appear. OK. I think we have
them here.

John Travolta, or —

a version of him. Let's take a look.

Female: Hey. Male: And that is how it's done. Female: Your turn. Male: Hey, guys! Check this
out.(Song: "You're the one that I want")Danny: Sandy!Sandy: Tell me about it,
stud.

I got chills. They're multiplyingAnd I'm losing control'Cause the power you're
supplyingIt's electrifying!(Video ends)(Applause and cheers)Diego Prilusky: Thank
you.(Applause and cheers)So as you can see, we can watch and experience content in the
traditional way or in an immersive way. Really, the possibilities are open. We're not
trying to change or replace movies. We're enhancing them. The technologies enable new
possibilities to start thinking beyond the flat screen. We're in immersive and really
exciting times in filmmaking. We're at the threshold of a new era. We're opening the gates
for new possibilities of immersive storytelling, and exploration and defining what
immersive media filmmaking means. We're really just at the beginning, and we invite you
all to join us. Thank you.

<!--
ad_duration=3.33
comment_count=8
event="TEDSummit 2019"
external_start_time=0
intro_duration=11.82
is_subtitle_required="False"
is_talk_featured="True"
language="en"
language_swap="False"
native_language="en"
number_of_related_talks=6
number_of_speakers=1
number_of_subtitled_videos=13
number_of_tags=7
number_of_talk_download_languages=13
number_of_talk_more_resources=0
number_of_talk_recommendations=0
number_of_talks_take_actions=0
post_ad_duration=0.83
published_timestamp="2020-02-21 15:53:11"
recording_date="2019-07-20"
speaker_description="Filmmaking pioneer"
speaker_is_published=1
speaker_name="Diego Prilusky"
talk_name="How volumetric video brings a new dimension to filmmaking"
talks_tags=["entertainment","film","movies","technology","creativity","innovation","media"]
url_photo_speaker="https://pe.tedcdn.com/images/ted/1b25467a663833656bb22a0ef7b06b2017f0adbc_254x191.jpg"
url_photo_talk="https://s3.amazonaws.com/talkstar-photos/uploads/79a2434c-0b79-473a-a03d-c851158b048d/DiegoPrilusky_2019T-embed.jpg"
url_webpage="https://www.ted.com/talks/diego_prilusky_how_volumetric_video_brings_a_new_dimension_to_filmmaking"
video_type_name="TED Stage Talk"
-->