---
title: The path to ending systemic racism in the US
speaker: Dr. Phillip Atiba Goff, Rashad Robinson, Dr. Bernice King, Anthony D. Romero
description: >-
 In a time of mourning and anger over the ongoing violence inflicted on Black
 communities by police in the US and the lack of accountability from national
 leadership, what is the path forward? Sharing urgent insights into this historic
 moment, Dr. Phillip Atiba Goff, Rashad Robinson, Dr. Bernice King and Anthony D.
 Romero discuss dismantling the systems of oppression and racism responsible for
 tragedies like the murders of Ahmaud Arbery, Breonna Taylor, George Floyd and far
 too many others -- and explore how the US can start to live up to its ideals.
 (This discussion, hosted by head of TED Chris Anderson and current affairs
 curator Whitney Pennington Rodgers, was recorded on June 3, 2020.)
date: 2020-06-03
tags: ["race","social-change","justice-system","inequality","violence","united-states","criminal-justice","society","community","government","activism","policy","identity","humanity","history","law"]
slug: dr_phillip_atiba_goff_rashad_robinson_dr_bernice_king_anthony_d_romero_the_path_to_ending_systemic_racism_in_the_us
---

Chris Anderson: Hello, TED community, welcome back for another live conversation. It's a
big one today, as big as they get. You know, when we created this "Build Back Better"
series our thought was how could we address issues arising out of the pandemic, how could
we imagine building back from that. But the events of this past week, the horrific death
of George Floyd and the daily protests that have followed, I mean, they provided a new
urgency which we, of course, simply have to address. I mean, can we build back better from
this? I think before we can even start to answer that question, we just have to seek to
understand the immensity of this moment. Whitney Pennington Rodgers: That's right, Chris.
Right now, so many people in the United States and beyond are grappling with feelings of
anger and frustration, deep, deep sadness and really helplessness. No matter who you are,
you have questions about what to do now, how to make things better.

And as we've seen, violence like this unfolds for many, many years. What is the path
forward? CA: So — We're joined today by a group of activists, organizers and leaders known
for their crucial work in social justice and civil rights. We're so grateful to have them
here to engage in a discussion about racial injustice in America, the unbearable acts of
violence that we've — Acts of violence against the black community that we've witnessed,
the dangers to a nation riven by anger and fear. And how on earth we can move forward from
this to something better. So first, each of our four guests will share their thoughts on
how we move forward from this moment. And then we'll engage as a group, including you, the
TED community. WPR: And we'd like to thank our partner, the Project Management Institute.
Their generous support has helped make today's interviews possible, and of course, as
Chris mentioned, we want you to take part in the conversation, so please share your
questions using our Ask a question feature and continue to share your thoughts in the
discussion thread. CA: Thanks, Whitney.

OK, let's get this moving. Our first guest. Dr. Phillip Atiba Goff is the founder and CEO
of the Center for Policing Equity. They work with police departments across America,
including in Minneapolis, to seek measurable responses to racial bias. Phil, I can
scarcely imagine how the stress in the last week must have been for you. Welcome, and over
to you for your opening comments. Phillip Atiba Goff: Thanks, Chris. Yeah, this week has
been a gut punch to anybody who felt like we could be making progress in the way that we
put forward public safety that empowers particularly vulnerable communities. We started
working in Minneapolis about five years ago. At the time, it was, like most major cities
in the United States, a department that had a long history of unaccounted for violence
from law enforcement, targeting the most vulnerable black communities. And we tried to put
into place a number of things that we know work.

Change the culture, so that the culture can be accountable to the values of the community.
And what we saw was small but measurable progress. We always knew, with small and
measurable progress, that you're one tragic incident from going back to ground zero. But
the events of the last week and a half haven't brought us back to ground zero, they've
torched ground zero, and we've dug a hole that we have to dig ourselves out of. What I
hear from police chiefs who call me, from activists I talk to, from folks in the
communities that are literally on fire right now, I hear folks saying, I had one activist
say to me that the pain that he was feeling was too large to fit into his body. And
without thinking about it, I said right back, "That's because it's too large to fit into a
lifetime." What we're seeing isn't just the response to one gruesome, cruel, public
execution. A lynching. It's not just the reaction to three of them: Ahmaud Arbery, Breonna
Taylor and then George Floyd.

What we're seeing is the bill come due for the unpaid debts that this country owes to its
black residents. And it comes due usually every 20 to 30 years. It was Ferguson just six
years ago, but about 30 years before that, it was in the streets of Los Angeles, after the
verdict that exonerated the police that beat Rodney King on video. It was Newark, it was
Watts, it was Chicago, it was Tulsa, it was Chicago again. If we don't take a full
accounting of these debts that are owed, then we're going to keep paying it. Part of what
I've been experiencing in the last week and a half, and what I've been sharing with the
people who do this work, who are serious about it, is the acknowledgment, the
soul-crushing reality that at some point, when things stop being on fire, the cameras are
going to turn to something else. And the history that we have in this country is not just
a history of vicious neglect and a targeted abuse of black communities, it's also one
where we lose our attention for it.

And what that means for communities like in Baton Rouge, for those who still grieve Alton
Sterling, and in Baltimore, for those who are still grieving Freddie Gray, is that there
is not just a chance, there's a likelihood that we are a month or two months out from this
with no more to show for it than what we had to show after Michael Brown Jr. And holding
the weight of that, individually and collectively, is just too much. It's just too heavy a
load for a person or a people, or a generation to hold up. What we're seeing is the
unrepentant sins, the unpaid debts. And so the solution can't just be that we fix
policing. It can't be only incremental reform. It can't be only systems of accountability
to catch cops after they've killed somebody. Because there's no such thing as justice for
George Floyd. There's maybe accountability. There's maybe some relief from the people who
are still around, who loved him, for his daughter who spoke out yesterday and said, "My
Daddy changed the world." There won't be justice for a man who's dead when he didn't have
to be.

But we're not going to get to where we need to go just by reforming police. So in addition
to the work that CPE is known for with the data, we have been encouraging departments and
cities to take the money that should be going to invest in communities, and take it from
police budgets, bring it to the communities. People ask, "Well, what could it possibly
look like? How could we imagine it?" And I tell people, there is a place where we do this
in the United States right now. We've all heard about it, whispered, some of us have even
been there, some of us live there. The place is called the suburbs, where we already have
enough resources to give to people, so they don't need the police for public safety in the
first place. If someone has a substance abuse issue, they can go to a clinic. If somebody
has a medical issue, they've got insurance, they can go to a hospital. If there's a
domestic dispute, they have friends, they have support. You don't need to enter a badge
and a gun into it.

If we hadn't disinvested from all the public resources that were available in communities
that most needed those, we wouldn't need police in the first place, and many have been
arguing, even more loudly recently, that we don't. If we would just take the money that we
use to punish, and instead invest it in the promise and the genius of the community that
could be there. So I don't know all the ways we're going to get there. I know it's going to
take everything and. It's going to need the kind of systemic change and the management
tools that we traditionally offer. It's also going to need a quantum change in the way
that we think about public safety. But mostly, this isn't just a policing problem. This is
the unpaid debts that are owed to black America. The bill is coming due. And we need to
start getting an accounting together, so we're not just paying off the interest of the
damn thing. WPR: Thank you, Phil.

Rashad Robinson is the president of Color Of Change, a civil rights organization that
advocates for racial justice for the black community. To date, more than four million
people have signed their petition to arrest the officers involved in the murder of George
Floyd. And of course, one was arrested last week. Thank you so much for being with us,
Rashad, welcome. Rashad Robinson: Thank you. And thank you for having me. It's an
opportunity that I'm taking today to just tell you about how you can get involved. How you
can take action, because right now, strategic action is critical for all of us to do the
work to change the rules that far too often keep the systems in place that hold us back.
Make no mistake, the criminal justice system is not broken. It is operating exactly the
way it was designed. At every single level, the criminal justice system is not about
providing justice, but about ensuring that certain people, certain communities are
protected, while other communities are violated.

And so I wan to talk a little bit today about Color Of Change, about activism, about the
work that's happening on the ground from other organizations all around the country, and
the way that you can channel this energy. What we talk about at Color Of Change is how do
you channel presence into power. Far too often we mistake presence and visibility for
power, presence retweets the stories of the movement, people feeling passion about change
could sometimes make us feel like change is inevitable, but power is actually the ability
to change the rules. And right now, every day, people are taking action, and what we're
trying to channel that energy into is a couple of things. First is a whole set of demands
at the federal level and at the local level. As Phil described, policing operates on many
different channels. And what we need to recognize is that while there are a lot of things
that can happen at the federal level, locally all around the country there are decisions
that are being made in communities around how policing is executed, where community needs
to hold a deeper level of accountability, at the state level we need new
laws.

So at Color Of Change, we've built a whole platform around a set of demands and are
working to build more energy for everyday people to take action. We're fighting for
justice for Ahmaud Arbery, Breonna Taylor and George Floyd, we're also fighting for
justice for other folks whose names you haven't heard, Nina Pop and others, whose stories
of injustice and the relationship to the criminal justice system represent all the ways in
which fighting right now is important. Over the last couple of years, we have worked to
build a movement, to hold district attorneys accountable and to change the role of
district attorneys in our country. And through the Winning Justice platform at Color Of
Change, www.winningjustice.org, what we have worked to do is channel the energy of
everyday people to take action. So, for folks who are watching what's happening on TV,
seeing it on their social media feeds and are outraged about what's happening in Georgia,
what's happening in Tennessee, what's happening in Minnesota, you yourself, probably, most
likely, live in a place, in a community where you have a district attorney that will not
hold police accountable, that will not prosecute police when they harm, hurt black folks,
when they violate the laws, you live in a community where police are part of the structure
that is racking up mass incarceration, but many other aspects of our system are racking up
mass incarceration, and district attorneys are at the center of it.

You live in those communities and you need to do something about it. And so at
winningjustice.org, we've created the only searchable, national database on the 2,400
prosecutors around the country. We're building local squads and communities for folks to
be able to engage around efforts that hold DAs accountable. We've worked with our partners
across the movement, from our friends in Black Lives Matter, to folks who do policy work,
to our friends at local ACLU chapters around the country, to build six demands. Six
demands that folks can get behind in terms of pushing for reform, and then we've built
public education material. But the only way that we work to change the way that
prosecution happens in this country is that if people get involved. If people raise their
voice, if people join us in pushing for real change. At the end of the day, I want people
to recognize though, and Phillip talked a little bit about this, is that people don't
experience issues, they experience life.

That the forces that hold us back are deeply interrelated, a racist criminal justice
system requires a racist media culture to survive, a political inequality follows economic
inequality, they all go hand in hand. And so I also want us to not take ourselves out of
the equation. We likely work inside of corporations that may post symbols for Black Lives
Matter one day, and then support politicians that work to destroy Black Lives Matter the
next day. We oftentimes are engaged in practices inside of our companies or in our daily
lives supporting media properties and others that are harming our communities, are telling
stories. Recently, we produced a report at Color Of Change with the Norman Lear school at
USC. It's called "Normalizing Injustice," and it can be found at changehollywood.org. And
"Normalizing Injustice" looks at the 22 crime procedurals, those crime shows on TV. And
looks at all of the ways in which they, sort of, create a warped perception about our view
of justice.

They create sort of an incentive for the type of policing we see on the country, and
actually serve as a PR arm for law enforcement. We've been working in writers rooms around
the country to work to push folks to tell better stories, but we need folks to be both
active listeners, and we need folks in the industry to push back and challenge those, not
only the structures that lead to that content coming on the air, but the proliferation
across our airwaves. At the end of the day, we have an opportunity in this moment to make
change. Inflection points are those moments where we have an opportunity to make huge
leaps forward, or the real, real threat of falling backwards. In our hands is the ability
to do some incredible things about undoing so many of the injustices that have stood in
the way of progress for far too long. But everyday people must get involved. We must
channel that presence into power, and we must build the type of power that changes the
rules.

Racism in so many ways is like water pouring over a floor with holes in it. Every single —
In every single way, it will find the holes. And so for us, we cannot simply accept
charitable solutions to structural problems, but we actually have to work for structural
change. And so I want to end by saying one thing about how we talk about black people and
how we talk about black communities in this moment. Because we have to say what we mean,
and we have to build the narrative that gets us to where we want to go. So far too often,
we talk about black communities as vulnerable, we talk about black people as vulnerable,
but vulnerability is a personal trait, black communities have been under attack. Black
communities have been exploited, black communities have been targeted, and we need to say
that, so we don't put the onus on fixing black families and communities, but we put the
onus on fixing the structures that have harmed us.

We will say things like, "Black people are less likely to get loans from banks," instead
of saying that banks are less likely to give loans to black people. This is our
opportunity to build the type of progress that makes real change, and at the center of
this story, we need to show and elevate the images not just of the pain that we are
facing, but of the joy, the brilliance and the creativity that black people have brought
to this country. Black people are the protagonist of this story, and we need to make sure
that as we work to build a new tomorrow, we ensure that the heroes are at the center of
the liberation that we all need. Thank you. CA: Thank you, Rashad. Dr. Bernice King is the
CEO of the King Center in Atlanta, Georgia. The center is a living memorial to her father,
Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. It's dedicated to inspiring new generations to carry his work
forward. In this moment, when so many are hurting, how can we better approach unity and
collective healing? Dr.

King, over to you. Bernice King: My heart is a little heavy right now, because I was that
six-year-old. I was five years old when my father was assassinated. And he did change the
world. But the tragedy is that we didn't hear what he was saying to us as a prophet to
this nation. And his words are now reverberating back to us. Change, we all know, is
necessary right now. And yet, it's not easy. We know that there has to be changes in
policing in this nation of ours. But I want to talk about America's choice at a greater
level. The prophet said to us, "We still have a choice today: nonviolent coexistence, or
violent coannihilation." What we have witnessed over the last eight days has placed that
choice before us. We have seen literally in the streets of our nation people who have been
following the path of nonviolent protest, and people who have been hell-bent on
destruction. Those choices are now looking at us, and we have to make a
choice.

The history of this nation was founded in violence. In fact, my father said America is the
greatest purveyor of violence. And the only way forward is if we repent for being a nation
built on violence. And I'm not just talking about physical violence. I'm talking about
systemic violence, I'm talking about policy violence, I'm talking about what he spoke of
are the triple evils of poverty, racism and militarism. All violent. Albert Einstein said
something to us. He said we cannot solve problems on the same level of thinking in which
they were created. And so if we are going to move forward, we are going to have to
deconstruct these systems of violence that we have set in America. And we're going to have
to reconstruct on another foundation. That foundation happens to be love and nonviolence.
And so, as we move forward, we can correct course if we make that choice that Daddy said,
nonviolent coexistence. And not continue on the pathway of violent coannihilation. So what
does that look like?

That looks like some deconstruction work in order to get to the construction. We have to
deconstruct our thinking. We've got to deconstruct the way in which we see people and
deconstruct the way in which we operate, practice and engage and set policy. And so I
believe that there's a lot of heart, h-e-a-r-t work to do, in the midst of all the
h-a-r-d, hard work to do. Because heart work is hard work. One of the things we have to do
is we have to ensure that everyone, especially my white brothers and sisters, have to
engage in the heart work, the antiracism work, in our hearts. No one is exempt from this,
especially in my white community. We must do that work in our hearts, the antiracism work.
The second thing is that I encourage people to look at the nonviolence training that we
[have] at the King Center, thekingcenter.org, so that we learn the foundation of
understanding our interrelatedness and interconnectedness.

That we understand our loyalties and our commitments and our policy-making can no longer
be devoted to one group of people, but has to be devoted to the greater good of all
people. And so I'm inviting people to even join us on our own line of protest that's
happening every night at seven o'clock pm on the King Center Facebook page, because so
many people have things that they want to express and contribute to this. We all have to
change and have to make a choice. It is a choice to change the direction that we have been
going. We need a revolution of values in this country. That's what my Daddy said. He
changed the world, he changed hearts, and now, what has happened over the last seven,
eight years and through history, we have to change course. And we all have to participate
in changing America with the true revolution of values, where people are at the center,
and not profit. Where morality is at the center, and not our military might. America does
have a choice.

We can either choose to go down continually that path of destruction, or we can choose
nonviolent coexistence. And as my mother said, struggle is a never-ending process, freedom
is never really won. You earn it and win it in every generation. Every generation is
called to this freedom struggle. You as a person may want to exempt yourself, but every
generation is called. And so I encourage corporations in America to start doing antiracism
work within corporate America. I encourage every industry to start doing antiracism work,
and pick up the banner of understanding nonviolent change, personally, and from a social
change perspective. We can do this. We can make the right choice to ultimately build the
beloved community. Thank you. WPR: Thank you, Dr. King. Anthony Romero is the executive
director of American Civil Liberties Union. As one of the nation's oldest social justice
organizations, the ACLU has advocated for racial equality and shown deep support to the
black community in moments of crisis.

And in moments like these, black voices are almost always the loudest and at times the
silence from our nonblack brothers and sisters can feel deafening. How we can bring our
allies into the mix, to better support ending systemic violence and racism against the
black communities, is a question top of mind for a lot of us. Anthony, welcome to the
show, and thank you so much for being with us. Anthony Romero: Great. Thank you, thank you
Whitney, thank you, Chris, for inviting me to join this TED community. I think community
is really important right now. With so many of us feeling trepidation, the weariness, the
anger, the fear, the frustration, the terrorism that we've experienced in our communities.
This is a time to huddle around a virtual campfire, with your posse, with your family,
with your loved ones, with your network. It's not a time to be isolated or alone. And I
think for allies in this struggle, those of us who don't live this experience every day,
it is time for us to lean in.

You can't change the channel, you can't tune out, you can't say, "This is too hard." It is
not that hard for us to listen and learn and heed. It is the only way we're going to build
out of this, by hearing the voices of Rashad, and Phil and Dr. King. By hearing the voices
of our neighbors and loved ones, by hearing the voices on Twitter of people who we don't
know. And so white communities and allied organizations need to pay even closer attention.
This is the test of your character. How willing are you to lean in and to engage. For me,
I have —These have been really hard couple of weeks. I feel like this is really a test of
whether or not we really believe in the American experiment. Do we really believe it? Do
we really believe that out of many, one, a country with no unifying language, no unifying
culture, no unifying religion, can we really become one people? All equal before the law?
All bound together with a belief in the rule of law?

Do we really believe that or do we just think it's a nice saying to see on the back of a
paper dollar? And for me, this is a referendum on the American experiment. On whether we
really believe, and ... the future is in our hands. And this is not like other crises, I've
been the head of the ACLU for almost 20 years, I feel like I've seen it all. This is
different. And this is different because it is cumulative, like Phil and Rashad and Dr.
King told us, this is centuries of systemic discrimination, and the bill has come due. And
it will continue to be due, and we will pay. Unless we really do something quite
different. I have been scratching my head at the ACLU for the last week. We've been at this
for 100 years. My organization has been working on this from its inception. In 1931, we
were involved with this report about lawlessness in law enforcement. That was our first
report that we got behind in 1931.

We opened up our first door fronts after the riots in Watts, so that we can bring legal
services and lawyers to the communities so they could demand justice from the police
departments. You know, we brought Miranda, you know, the right to remain silent, and we
brought Gideon, the right to a court-appointed attorney if you can't afford one. We fought
Bloomberg on "stop-and-frisk," it took him years and he lost in front of our litigation to
finally apologize. We've been at this for 100 years. And for the communities that have
lived this for 400 years, God. I've been scratching my head, thinking. It ain't working.
We don't need another pattern and practice lawsuit. We don't need another training program
on racial bias or implicit bias in police departments, we don't need to file another
lawsuit on qualified immunity, we don't need to, kind of, bring another race
discrimination or gender discrimination lawsuit to integrate the police
department.

Yeah, we've done that and we will continue to do that. For me, where I've come, is that we
need to defund the budgets of these police departments. It's the only way we're going to
take the power back. And the more I read over the last couple of weeks about where this
country is, the more I'm clear that that is my North star at the moment. We will continue
to bring the litigation on qualified immunity, we will do the efforts to hold
unaccountable law enforcement officials accountable, we will bring pattern and practice
lawsuits, because the justice department is not doing that, so we will continue to do all
that good work. But the real thing is, we're going to go after those budgets. When you
look at the fact that we spend 100 million dollars on policing, more than incarceration,
that the city of Minneapolis spent 30 percent of their budget on policing. The city of
Oakland, 41 percent on policing.

That when you have New York City police department spend more money on policing than it
does on housing and preservation development, community youth services, homelessness.
We're going after the money. And that's hard-core advocacy. Bills drop in local
legislatures to cut the funding for police, to stop these programs that give the federal
military surplus to police departments, so they become, like, little mini armies, these
don't look like police officers, these look like standing armies. And the enemy are
communities of color. So we need to take away their toys. We need to cut their budgets. We
need to shrink the police infrastructure, so that we can get police out of the quotidian
lives of people of color and communities of color. The ubiquitousness of police
enforcement on things that the police do not have a role, should not have a role to play.
People should not lose their lives over whether or not a cigarette pack has a proper tax
stamp, or whether a 20-dollar bill was forged or not.

That's not worthy of spending our dollars on police. Get them out of that business, let's
focus on the most important and the most serious of crimes, and that's it. That's it.
We're going to depolice our communities. Shrink those budgets. We're going to reinvest
those moneys in local communities, it will be like water on stone campaigns, local
legislatures, local city counsels, lab report cards, for people who talk out of both sides
of their mouths and say, "We believe in police reform," and yet, they're still going to
vote for 30 or 40 percent for the police? We're going to put that right to the public. And
I think we just have to stay at it, because I think that's the only way we can get at this
in a different way. Because much of what we tried to do is just simply not working. You
know, with that, I struggle with, how do you find the optimism in this moment, because you
have to find the optimism.

You have to find the way to still think that even though on the face of so many setbacks,
there's been change. It's been too little, too slow, not enough. We need to kind of, rock
it, boost it. But you can't lose sight of the optimism. And you know, I've been thinking
about who are the folks inspiring me, and Dr. King's father, of course, and the words of
Rashad and Patrisse Cullors and others have inspired me. But I find inspiration in the
words of a scholar I really don't like bringing up, Sam Huntington, kind of often
criticized as being a conservative, a racist. But sometimes you can find inspiration even
in your enemy's words. And in one of his books, which I pulled off the shelf I have, he
writes about how America is a disappointment, because it failed to live up to its
aspirations. And he actually started talking about, America is a failure because it
doesn't live up to its ideals. But it's not a failure, it's not a bunch of lies. It's a
disappointment.

And in the disappointment also is the fact that there's hope. I'm paraphrasing it, but I
think we have to kind of, wrap all of that together, and think about the disappointment
and the hope and the resolve to do better. And we need to listen and lean in, and I thank
the TED community, I thank Dr. King, I thank Rashad, I thank Phil. Thank you. CA: Wow.
Thank you to all four of you, that was astonishing. I guess we're bringing everyone back
now to have a conversation among us, to answer questions from our community, I hope you're
entering those questions. So I don't know whether we can bring back our guests onto the
screen at this point. Welcome back. Let me start with a question to you, Dr. King, I was so
inspired by what you said. Your father, of course, also deeply understood the anger that
leads to protest. I think he said that protests are the language of the unheard. And I'm
wondering what you would say to someone right now who is angered beyond measure by what's
happened, and also sees this could be the moment, you know, like, someone who believes the
system is so fundamentally broken, that our best choice is to tear it down, that that is
actually — This may be a once-in-a-generation moment to do that.

And so to actually believe that protest, including violent protest, actually is the way
right now. What would you say to someone who felt that? BK: First, I just wanted to make
just a slight correction, he said riots are the language of the unheard. CA: I apologize, I
apologize. But that is the point even more powerfully, yeah. BK: Yes. Protest we must, and
we must continue to always protest, to keep the issues in the awareness before people, but
you know, when a person is angry, sometimes it's hard to reach them. I've been on that
journey, I was at a stage of my life where I was so angry, I wanted to destroy, and I'm
the daughter of Martin Luther King Jr., and grew up in a household of love and nonviolence
and forgiveness, and I had to go through that journey I was surrounded by the right kind
of influences, fortunately. Because that would have been a sad story. But I think it's
really allowing ourselves to hear the anger and allowing the space for the anger, but also
trying to help young people rechannel that energy.

And we've got to start ensuring that we connect them to some of the work that has been and
now is elevated to another place. Color Of Change, the work that you're doing, the ACLU,
the work that they're doing, because sometimes, there's this disconnection that
intensifies the emotion and makes you feel helpless. But if you can channel that anger,
connect it with action that is toward creating the social and economic change, then it
begins to build you up, and then you can begin to become more constructive with the
anger. WPR: We have some questions that are coming in from our community, but before we do
that, you all shared such powerful, meaningful statements right now, and many of you
touched on the fact that this is not the first time that we're experiencing this. The
murder of George Floyd, Ahmaud Arbery, Breonna Taylor, this is one of — these are three of
many, many instances just like this, and I'd love to hear you all address was has, sort
of, brought us to this boiling point, what has contributed to this moment where we're now
experiencing things, Anthony, as you said, that feels so much worse than other
moments?

And that's it, anyone who feels comfortable to take that question. AR: Rashad, I want to
hear you. BK: I wanted to say something. I think we've always been at that moment. But this
moment is different, because of the void in leadership. There's no real moral voice in our
country, and the person who sits in the office of the presidency is not, you know, leading
in the right way. And has kind of — no, not kin

<!--
ad_duration=3.33
comment_count=57
event="TED2020"
external_duration=0
external_start_time=0
has_talk_citation=1
intro_duration=11.82
is_subtitle_required="False"
is_talk_featured="True"
language="en"
language_swap="False"
native_language="en"
number_of_related_talks=6
number_of_speakers=6
number_of_subtitled_videos=1
number_of_tags=16
number_of_talk_download_languages=1
number_of_talk_more_resources=0
number_of_talk_recommendations=0
number_of_talks_take_actions=0
post_ad_duration=0.83
published_timestamp="2020-06-03 21:40:23"
recording_date="2020-06-03"
speaker_description="CEO, Center for Policing Equity"
speaker_is_published=1
speaker_name="Dr. Phillip Atiba Goff, Rashad Robinson, Dr. Bernice King, Anthony D. Romero"
talk_more_resources=[]
talk_name="The path to ending systemic racism in the US"
talks_tags=["race","social-change","justice-system","inequality","violence","united-states","criminal-justice","society","community","government","activism","policy","identity","humanity","history","law"]
talks_take_action=[]
url_audio="https://download.ted.com/talks/GoffandRobinsonandKingandRomero_2020.mp3?apikey=acme-roadrunner"
url_photo_speaker="https://pe.tedcdn.com/images/ted/74784bcaf52ba79e5c302eee4d28d944253278f9_254x191.jpg"
url_photo_talk="https://s3.amazonaws.com/talkstar-photos/uploads/2c9f170e-7b61-4988-983d-f27c874a7d7a/Goff_King_Robinson_Romero_2020S-embed.jpg"
video_type_name="TED Stage Talk"
-->