---
title: How the heart actually pumps blood
speaker: Edmond Hui
description: >-
 For most of history, scientists weren't quite sure why our hearts were beating or
 even what purpose they served. Eventually, we realized that these thumping organs
 serve the vital task of pumping clean blood throughout the body. But how? Edmond
 Hui investigates how it all works by taking a closer look at the heart's highly
 efficient ventricle system. [Directed by Anton Bogaty, narrated by Addison
 Anderson].
date: 2014-05-20
tags: ["healthcare","heart-health","health","health-care","public-health","biology","science","human-body","physiology","teded","animation"]
slug: edmond_hui_how_the_heart_actually_pumps_blood
---

For most of history, humans had no idea what purpose the heart served. In fact, the organ
so confused Leonardo da Vinci, that he gave up studying it. Although everyone could feel
their own heart beating, it wasn't always clear what each thump was achieving. Now we know
that the heart pumps blood. But that fact wasn't always obvious, because if a heart was
exposed or taken out, the body would perish quickly. It's also impossible to see through
the blood vessels, and even if that were possible, the blood itself is opaque, making it
difficult to see the heart valves working. Even in the 21st century, only a few people in
surgery teams have actually seen a working heart. Internet searches for heart function,
point to crude models, diagrams or animations that don't really show how it works. It's as
if there has been a centuries old conspiracy amongst teachers and students to accept that
heart function cannot be demonstrated.

Meaning that the next best thing is simply to cut it open and label the parts. That way
students might not fully grasp the way it works, but can superficially understand it,
learning such concepts as the heart is a four-chambered organ, or potentially misleading
statements like, mammals have a dual-circulation: one with blood going to the lungs and
back, and another to the body and back. In reality, mammals have a figure-eight
circulation. Blood goes from one heart pump to the lungs, back to the second heart pump,
which sends it to the body, and then back to the first pump. That's an important
difference because it marks two completely different morphologies. This confusion makes
many students wary of the heart in biology lessons, thinking it signals an intimidating
subject full of complicated names and diagrams. Only those who end up studying medicine
compeltely understand how it all actually works.

That's when its functions become apparent as medics get to observe the motion of the
heart's valves. So, let's imagine you're a medic for a day. What you'll need to get
started is a whole fresh heart, like one from a sheep or pig. Immerse this heart in water
and you'll see that it doesn't pump when squeezed by hand. That's because water doesn't
enter the heart cleanly enough for the pumping mechanism to work. We can solve this
problem in an extraordinarly simple way. Simply identify the two atria and cut them off,
trimming them down to the tops of the ventricles. This makes the heart look less
complicated because the atria have several incoming veins attached. So without them there,
the only vessels remaining are the two major heart arteries: the aorta and pulmonary
artery, which rise like white columns from between the ventricles. It looks — and really
is — very simple. If you run water into the right ventricle from a tap (the left also
works, but less spectacularly), you'll see that the ventricular valve tries to close
against the incoming stream.

And then ventricle inflates with water. Squeeze the ventricle and a stream of water
squirts out of the pulmonary artery. The ventricular valves, called the tricuspid in the
right ventricle and the mitral in the left, can be seen through the clear water opening
and closing like parachutes as the ventricle is rhythmically squeezed. This flow of water
mimics the flow of blood in life. The valves are completely efficient. You'll notice they
don't leak at all when the ventricles are squeezed. Over time, they also close against
each other with very little wear and tear, which explains how this mechanism continues to
work seamlessly for more than 2 billion beats a heart gives in its lifetime. Now, anyone
studying the heart can hold one in their hands, make it pump for real and watch the action
unfold. So place your hand above your own and feel its rhymic beat. Understanding how this
dependable inner pump works gives new resonance to the feeling you get when you run a
race, drink too much caffeine or catch the eye of the one you love.

<!--
ad_duration=0
event="TED-Ed"
external_start_time=0
intro_duration=0
is_subtitle_required="False"
is_talk_featured="False"
language="en"
language_swap="False"
native_language="en"
number_of_related_talks=6
number_of_speakers=1
number_of_subtitled_videos=0
number_of_tags=11
number_of_talk_download_languages=24
number_of_talk_more_resources=0
number_of_talk_recommendations=0
number_of_talks_take_actions=0
post_ad_duration=0
published_timestamp="2019-03-01 16:27:07"
recording_date="2014-05-20"
speaker_is_published=0
speaker_name="Edmond Hui"
talk_name="How the heart actually pumps blood"
talks_tags=["healthcare","heart-health","health","health-care","public-health","biology","science","human-body","physiology","teded","animation"]
url_photo_talk="https://s3.amazonaws.com/talkstar-photos/uploads/5fa002f5-dea0-436e-9ce6-af7fbdfc6d4d/66_heart.jpg"
url_webpage="https://www.ted.com/talks/edmond_hui_how_the_heart_actually_pumps_blood"
video_type_name="TED-Ed Original"
-->