---
title: What obligation do social media platforms have to the greater good?
speaker: Eli Pariser
description: >-
 Social media has become our new home. Can we build it better? Taking design cues
 from urban planners and social scientists, technologist Eli Pariser shows how the
 problems we're encountering on digital platforms aren't all that new -- and
 shares how, by following the model of thriving towns and cities, we can create
 trustworthy online communities.
date: 2019-07-20
tags: ["social-media","media","urban-planning","internet","community","cities","public-spaces","web","urban"]
slug: eli_pariser_what_obligation_do_social_media_platforms_have_to_the_greater_good
---

I was talking to a guy at a party in California about tech platforms and the problems
they're creating in society. And he said, "Man, if the CEOs just did more drugs and went
to Burning Man, we wouldn't be in this mess."

I said, "I'm not sure I agree with you." For one thing, most of the CEOs have already been
to Burning Man.

But also, I'm just not sure that watching a bunch of half-naked people run around and burn
things is really the inspiration they need right now.

But I do agree that things are a mess. And so, we're going to come back to this guy, but
let's talk about the mess. Our climate's getting hotter and hotter. It's getting harder and
harder to tell truth from fiction. And we've got this global migratory crisis. And just at
the moment when we really need new tools and new ways of coming together as a society, it
feels like social media is kind of tearing at our civic fabric and setting us against each
other. We've got viral misinformation on WhatsApp, bullying on Instagram and Russian
hackers on Facebook. And I think this conversation that we're having right now about the
harms that these platforms are creating is so important. But I also worry that we could be
letting a kind of good existential crisis in Silicon Valley go to waste if the bar for
success is just that it's a little harder for Macedonian teenagers to publish false news.
The big question, I think, is not just what do we want platforms to stop doing, but now
that they've effectively taken control of our online public square, what do we need from
them for the greater good?

To me, this is one of the most important questions of our time. What obligations do tech
platforms have to us in exchange for the power we let them hold over our discourse? I
think this question is so important, because even if today’s platforms go away, we need to
answer this question in order to be able to ensure that the new platforms that come back
are any better. So for the last year, I've been working with Dr. Talia Stroud at the
University of Texas, Austin. We've talked to sociologists and political scientists and
philosophers to try to answer this question. And at first we asked, "If you were Twitter
or Facebook and trying to rank content for democracy rather than for ad clicks or
engagement, what might that look like?" But then we realized, this sort of suggests that
this is an information problem or a content problem. And for us, the platform crisis is a
people problem. It's a problem about the emergent weird things that happen when large
groups of people get together.

And so we turned to another, older idea. We asked, "What happens when we think about
platforms as spaces?" We know from social psychology that spaces shape behavior. You put
the same group of people in a room like this, and they're going to behave really
differently than in a room like this. When researchers put softer furniture in classrooms,
participation rates rose by 42 percent. And spaces even have political consequences. When
researchers looked at neighborhoods with parks versus neighborhoods without, after
adjusting for socioeconomic factors, they found that neighborhoods with parks had higher
levels of social trust and were better able to advocate for themselves politically. So
spaces shape behavior, partly by the way they're designed and partly by the way that they
encode certain norms about how to behave. We all know that there are some behaviors that
are OK in a bar that are not OK in a library, and maybe vice versa.

And this gives us a little bit of a clue, because there are online spaces that encode
these same kinds of behavioral norms. So, for example, behavior on LinkedIn seems pretty
good. Why? Because it reads as a workplace. And so people follow workplace norms. You can
even see it in the way they dress in their profile pictures.

So if LinkedIn is a workplace, what is Twitter like?

Well, it's like a vast, cavernous expanse, where there are people talking about sports,
arguing about politics, yelling at each other, flirting, trying to get a job, all in the
same place, with no walls, no divisions, and the owner gets paid more the louder the noise
is.

No wonder it's a mess. And this raises another thing that become obvious when we think
about platforms in terms of physical space. Good physical spaces are almost always
structured. They have rules. Silicon Valley is built on this idea that unstructured space
is conducive for human behavior. And I actually think there's a reason for this myopia
built into the location of Silicon Valley itself. So, Michele Gelfand is a sociologist who
studies how norms vary across cultures. And she watches how cultures like Japan — which
she calls "tight" — is very conformist, very rule-following, and cultures like Brazil are
very loose. You can see this even in things like how closely synchronized the clocks are
on a city street. So as you can see, the United States is one of the looser countries. And
the loosest state in the United States is, you got it, California. And Silicon Valley
culture came out of the 1970s Californian counterculture. So, just to recap: the spaces
that the world is living in came out of the loosest culture in the loosest state in one of
the loosest countries in the world.

No wonder they undervalue structure. And I think this really matters, because people need
structure. You may have heard this word "anomie." It literally means "a lack of norms" in
French. It was coined by Émile Durkheim to describe the vast, overwhelming feeling that
people have in spaces without norms. Anomie has political consequences. Because what
Gelfand has found is that, when things are too loose, people crave order and structure.
And that craving for order and structure correlates really strongly with support for
people like these guys.

I don't think it's crazy to ask if the structurelessness of online life is actually
feeding anxiety that's increasing a responsiveness to authoritarianism. So how might
platforms bring people together in a way that creates meaning and helps people understand
each other? And this brings me back to our friend from Burning Man. Because listening to
him, I realized: it's not just that Burning Man isn't the solution — it's actually a
perfect metaphor for the problem.

You know, it's a great place to visit for a week, this amazing art city, rising out of
nowhere in the dust. But you wouldn't want to live there.

There's no running water, there's no trash pickup. At some point, the hallucinogens run
out, and you're stuck with a bunch of wealthy white guys in the dust in the
desert.

Which, to me, is sometimes how social media feels in 2019.

A great, fun, hallucinatory place to visit has become our home. And so, if we look at
platforms through the lens of spaces, we can then ask ourselves: Who knows how to
structure spaces for the public good? And it turns out, this is a question people have
been thinking about for a long time about cities. Cities were the original platforms.
Two-sided marketplace? Check. Place to keep up with old friends and distant relatives?
Check. Vector for viral sharing? Check. In fact, cities have encountered a lot of the same
social and political challenges that platforms are now encountering. They've dealt with
massive growth that overwhelmed existing communities and the rise of new business models.
They've even had new, frictionless technologies that promised to connect everyone together
and that instead deepened existing social and race divides. But because of this history of
decay and renewal and segregation and integration, cities are the source of some of our
best ideas about how to build functional, thriving communities. Faced with a top-down,
car-driven vision of city life, pioneers like Jane Jacobs said, let’s instead put human
relationships at the center of urban design.

Jacobs and her fellow travelers like Holly Whyte, her editor, were these really great
observers of what actually happened on the street. They watched: Where did people stop and
talk? When did neighbors become friends? And they learned a lot. For example, they noticed
that successful public places generally have three different ways that they structure
behavior. There's the built environment, you know, that we're going to put a fountain here
or a playground there. But then, there's programming, like, let's put a band at seven and
get the kids out. And there's this idea of mayors, people who kind of take this informal
ownership of a space to keep it welcoming and clean. All three of these things actually
have analogues online. But platforms mostly focus on code, on what's physically possible
in the space. And they focus much less on these other two softer, social areas. What are
people doing there?

Who's taking responsibility for it? So like Jane Jacobs did for cities, Talia and I think
we need a new design movement for online space, one that considers not just "How do we
build products that work for users or consumers?" "How do we make something
user-friendly?" but "How do we make products that are public-friendly?" Because we need
products that don't serve individuals at the expense of the social fabric on which we all
depend. And we need it urgently, because political scientists tell us that healthy
democracies need healthy public spaces. So, the public-friendly digital design movement
that Talia and I imagine asks this question: What would this interaction be like if it was
happening in physical space? And it asks the reverse question: What can we learn from good
physical spaces about how to structure behavior in the online world? For example, I grew up
in a small town in Maine, and I went to a lot of those town hall meetings that you hear
about.

And unlike the storybook version, they weren't always nice. Like, people had big
conflicts, big feelings ... It was hard sometimes. But because of the way that that space
was structured, we managed to land it OK. How? Well, here's one important piece. The
downcast glance, the dirty look, the raised eyebrow, the cough ... When people went on too
long or lost the crowd, they didn't get banned or blocked or hauled out by the police,
they just got this soft, negative social feedback. And that was actually very powerful. I
think Facebook and Twitter could build this, something like this.

I think there are some other things that online spaces can learn from offline spaces.
Holly Whyte observed that in healthy public spaces, there are often many different places
that afford different ways of relating. So the picnic table where you have lunch with your
family may not be suited for the romantic walk with a partner or the talk with some
business colleagues. And it's worth noting that in real space, in none of these places are
there big, visible public signs of engagement. So digital designers could think about what
kind of conversations do we actually want to invite, and how do we build specifically for
those kinds of conversations. Remember the park that we talked about that built social
trust? That didn't happen because people were having these big political arguments. Most
strangers don't actually even talk to each other the first three or four or five times
they see each other.

But when people, even very different people, see each other a lot, they develop
familiarity, and that creates the bedrock for relationships. And I think, actually, you
know, maybe that early idea of cyberspace as kind of this bodiless meeting place of pure
minds and pure ideas sent us off in the wrong direction. Maybe what we need instead is to
find a way to be in proximity, mostly talking amongst ourselves, but all sharing the same
warm sun. And finally: healthy public spaces create a sense of ownership and equity. And
this is where the city metaphor becomes challenging. Because, if Twitter is a city, it's a
city that's owned by just a few people and optimized for financial return. I think we
really need digital environments that we all actually have some real ownership of,
environments that respect the diversity of human existence and that give us some say and
some input into the process. And I think we need this urgently.

Because Facebook right now — I sort of think of, like, 1970s New York.

The public spaces are decaying, there's trash in the streets, people are kind of, like,
mentally and emotionally warming themselves over burning garbage.

And —

And the natural response to this is to hole up in your apartment or consider fleeing for
the suburbs. It doesn't surprise me that people are giving up on the idea of online public
spaces the way that they've given up on cities over their history. And sometimes — I'll be
honest — it feels to me like this whole project of, like, wiring up a civilization and
getting billions of people to come into contact with each other is just impossible. But
modern cities tell us that it is possible for millions of people who are really different,
sometimes living right on top of each other, not just to not kill each other, but to
actually build things together, find new experiences, create beautiful, important
infrastructure. And we cannot give up on that promise. If we want to solve the big,
important problems in front of us, we need better online public spaces. We need digital
urban planners, new Jane Jacobses, who are going to build the parks and park benches of
the online world.

And we need digital, public-friendly architects, who are going to build what Eric
Klinenberg calls "palaces for the people" — libraries and museums and town halls. And we
need a transnational movement, where these spaces can learn from each other, just like
cities have, about everything from urban farming to public art to rapid transit. Humanity
moves forward when we find new ways to rely on and understand and trust each other. And we
need this now more than ever. If online digital spaces are going to be our new home, let's
make them a comfortable, beautiful place to live, a place we all feel not just included
but actually some ownership of. A place we get to know each other. A place you'd actually
want not just to visit but to bring your kids. Thank you.

<!--
ad_duration=3.33
comment_count=7
event="TEDSummit 2019"
external_start_time=0
has_talk_citation=0
intro_duration=11.82
is_subtitle_required="False"
is_talk_featured="True"
language="en"
language_swap="False"
native_language="en"
number_of_related_talks=6
number_of_speakers=1
number_of_subtitled_videos=12
number_of_tags=9
number_of_talk_download_languages=12
number_of_talk_more_resources=0
number_of_talk_recommendations=1
number_of_talks_take_actions=3
post_ad_duration=0.83
published_timestamp="2019-11-07 15:53:24"
recording_date="2019-07-20"
speaker_description="Online democracy advocate"
speaker_is_published=1
speaker_name="Eli Pariser"
talk_more_resources=[]
talk_name="What obligation do social media platforms have to the greater good?"
talk_recommendations_blurb="More resources curated by Eli Pariser"
talks_tags=["social-media","media","urban-planning","internet","community","cities","public-spaces","web","urban"]
url_audio="https://download.ted.com/talks/EliPariser_2019T.mp3?apikey=acme-roadrunner"
url_photo_speaker="https://pe.tedcdn.com/images/ted/84b47d66a3e55c6ce0b26addb4ed602982624889_254x191.jpg"
url_photo_talk="https://s3.amazonaws.com/talkstar-photos/uploads/708a332d-b4df-4cb3-b8f8-35763ab4829c/EliPariser_2019T-embed.jpg"
url_webpage="https://www.ted.com/talks/eli_pariser_what_obligation_do_social_media_platforms_have_to_the_greater_good"
video_type_name="TED Stage Talk"
-->