---
title: Why it's so hard to talk about the N-word
speaker: Elizabeth Stordeur Pryor
description: >-
 Historian Elizabeth Stordeur Pryor leads a thoughtful and history-backed
 examination of one of the most divisive words in the English language: the
 N-word. Drawing from personal experience, she explains how reflecting on our
 points of encounter with the word can help promote productive discussions and,
 ultimately, create a framework that reshapes education around the complicated
 history of racism in the US.
date: 2019-12-14
tags: ["education","race","history","society","tedx","culture","communication","storytelling"]
slug: elizabeth_stordeur_pryor_why_it_s_so_hard_to_talk_about_the_n_word
---

The minute she said it, the temperature in my classroom dropped. My students are usually
laser-focused on me, but they shifted in their seats and looked away. I'm a black woman who
teaches the histories of race and US slavery. I'm aware that my social identity is always
on display. And my students are vulnerable too, so I'm careful. I try to anticipate what
part of my lesson might go wrong. But honestly, I didn't even see this one coming. None of
my years of graduate school prepared me for what to do when the N-word entered my
classroom. I was in my first year of teaching when the student said the N-word in my class.
She was not calling anyone a name. She was bright-eyed and bushy-tailed. She came to class
with her readings done, she sat in the front row and she was always on my team. When she
said it, she was actually making a point about my lecture, by quoting a line from a 1970s
movie, a comedy, that had two racist slurs. One for people of Chinese descent and the
other the N-word.

As soon as she said it, I held up my hands, said, "Whoa, whoa." But she assured me, "It's
a joke from 'Blazing Saddles,'" and then she repeated it. This all happened 10 years ago,
and how I handled it haunted me for a long time. It wasn't the first time I thought about
the word in an academic setting. I'm a professor of US history, it's in a lot of the
documents that I teach. So I had to make a choice. After consulting with someone I
trusted, I decided to never say it. Not even to quote it. But instead to use the
euphemistic phrase, "the N-word." Even this decision was complicated. I didn't have tenure
yet, and I worried that senior colleagues would think that by using the phrase I wasn't a
serious scholar. But saying the actual word still felt worse. The incident in my classroom
forced me to publicly reckon with the word. The history, the violence, but also — The
history, the violence, but also any time it was hurled at me, spoken casually in front of
me, any time it rested on the tip of someone's tongue, it all came flooding up in that
moment, right in front of my students.

And I had no idea what to do. So I've come to call stories like mine points of encounter. A
point of encounter describes the moment you came face-to-face with the N-word. If you've
even been stumped or provoked by the word, whether as the result of an awkward social
situation, an uncomfortable academic conversation, something you heard in pop culture, or
if you've been called the slur, or witnessed someone getting called the slur, you have
experienced a point of encounter. And depending on who you are and how that moment goes
down, you might have a range of responses. Could throw you off a little bit, or it could
be incredibly painful and humiliating. I've had lots of these points of encounter in my
life, but one thing is true. There's not a lot of space to talk about them. That day in my
classroom was pretty much like all of those times I had an uninvited run-in with the
N-word. I froze. Because the N-word is hard to talk about.

Part of the reason the N-word is so hard to talk about, it's usually only discussed in one
way, as a figure of speech, we hear this all the time, right? It's just a word. The
burning question that cycles through social media is who can and cannot say it. Black
intellectual Ta-Nehisi Coates does a groundbreaking job of defending the African American
use of the word. On the other hand, Wendy Kaminer, a white freedom of speech advocate,
argues that if we don't all just come and say it, we give the word power. And a lot of
people feel that way. The Pew Center recently entered the debate. In a survey called "Race
in America 2019," researchers asked US adults if they thought is was OK for a white person
to say the N-word. Seventy percent of all adults surveyed said "never."And these debates
are important. But they really obscure something else. They keep us from getting
underneath to the real conversation. Which is that the N-word is not just a
word.

It's not neatly contained in a racist past, a relic of slavery. Fundamentally, the N-word
is an idea disguised as a word: that black people are intellectually, biologically and
immutably inferior to white people. And — and I think this is the most important part —
that that inferiority means that the injustice we suffer and inequality we endure is
essentially our own fault. So, yes, it is ...Speaking of the word only as racist spew or
as an obscenity in hip hop music makes it sounds as if it's a disease located in the
American vocal cords that can be snipped right out. It's not, and it can't. And I learned
this from talking to my students. So next time class met, I apologized, and I made an
announcement. I would have a new policy. Students would see the word in my PowerPoints, in
film, in essays they read, but we would never ever say the word out loud in class. Nobody
ever said it again. But they didn't learn much either.

Afterwards, what bothered me most was that I didn't even explain to students why, of all
the vile, problematic words in American English, why this particular word had its own
buffer, the surrogate phrase "the N-word."Most of my students, many of them born in the
late 1990s and afterwards, didn't even know that the phrase "the N-word" is a relatively
new invention in American English. When I was growing up, it didn't exist. But in the late
1980s, black college students, writers, intellectuals, more and more started to talk about
racist attacks against them. But increasingly, when they told these stories, they stopped
using the word. Instead, they reduced it to the initial N and called it "the N-word." They
felt that every time the word was uttered it opened up old wounds, so they refused to say
it. They knew their listeners would hear the actual word in their heads. That wasn't the
point. The point was they didn't want to put the word in their own mouths or into the
air.

By doing this, they made an entire nation start to second-guess themselves about saying
it. This was such a radical move that people are still mad about it. Critics accuse those
of us who use the phrase "the N-word," or people who become outraged, you know, just
because the word is said, of being overprincipled, politically correct or, as I just read
a couple of weeks ago in The New York Times, "insufferably woke." Right? So I bought into
this a little bit too, which is why the next time I taught the course I proposed a freedom
of speech debate. The N-word in academic spaces, for or against? I was certain students
would be eager to debate who gets to say it and who doesn't. But they weren't. Instead ...
my students started confessing. A white student from New Jersey talked about standing by
as a black kid at her school got bullied by this word. She did nothing and years later
still carried the guilt.

Another from Connecticut talked about the pain of severing a very close relationship with
a family member, because that family member refused to stop saying the word. One of the
most memorable stories came from a very quiet black student from South Carolina. She
didn't understand all the fuss. She said everyone at her school said the word. She wasn't
talking about kids calling each other names in the hall. She explained that at her school
when teachers and administrators became frustrated with an African American student, they
called that student the actual N-word. She said it didn't bother her at all. But then a
couple of days later, she came to visit me in my office hours and wept. She thought she
was immune. She realized that she wasn't. Over the last 10 years, I have literally heard
hundreds of these stories from all kinds of people from all ages. People in their 50s
remembering stories from the second grade and when they were six, either calling people
the word or being called the word, but carrying that all these years around this word, you
know.

And as I listened to people talk about their points of encounter, the pattern that emerged
for me as a teacher that I found most upsetting is the single most fraught site for these
points of encounter is the classroom. Most US kids are going to meet the N-word in class.
One of the most assigned books in US high schools is Mark Twain’s "The Adventures of
Huckleberry Finn" in which the word appears over 200 times. And this isn't an indictment
of "Huck Finn." The word is in lots of US literature and history. It's all over African
American literature. Yet I hear from students that when the word is said during a lesson
without discussion and context, it poisons the entire classroom environment. The trust
between student and teacher is broken. Even so, many teachers, often with the very best of
intentions, still say the N-word in class. They want to show and emphasize the horrors of
US racism, so they rely on it for shock value.

Invoking it brings into stark relief the ugliness of our nation's past. But they forget
the ideas are alive and well in our cultural fabric. The six-letter word is like a capsule
of accumulated hurt. Every time it is said, every time, it releases into the atmosphere
the hateful notion that black people are less. My black students tell me that when the
word is quoted or spoken in class, they feel like a giant spotlight is shining on them.
One of my students told me that his classmates were like bobbleheads, turning to gauge his
reaction. A white student told me that in the eighth grade, when they were learning "To
Kill a Mockingbird" and reading it out loud in class, the student was stressed out at the
idea of having to read the word, which the teacher insisted all students do, that the
student ended up spending most of the unit hiding out in the bathroom. This is serious.
Students across the country talk about switching majors and dropping classes because of
poor teaching around the N-word.

The issue of faculty carelessly speaking the word has reached such a fevered pitch, it's
led to protests at Princeton, Emory, The New School, Smith College, where I teach, and
Williams College, where just recently students have boycotted the entire English
Department over it and other issues. And these were just the cases that make the news.
This is a crisis. And while student reaction looks like an attack on freedom of speech, I
promise this is an issue of teaching. My students are not afraid of materials that have the
N-word in it. They want to learn about James Baldwin and William Faulkner and about the
civil rights movement. In fact, their stories show that this word is a central feature of
their lives as young people in the United States. It's in the music they love. And in the
popular culture they emulate, the comedy they watch, it's in TV and movies and
memorialized in museums. They hear it in locker rooms, on Instagram, in the hallways at
school, in the chat rooms of the video games they play.

It is all over the world they navigate. But they don't know how to think about it or even
really what the word means. I didn't even really understand what the word meant until I did
some research. I was astonished to learn that black people first incorporated the N-word
into the vocabulary as political protest, not in the 1970s or 1980s but as far back as the
1770s. And I wish I had more time to talk about the long, subversive history of the black
use of the N-word. But I will say this: Many times, my students will come up to me and
say, "I understand the virulent roots of this word, it's slavery." They are only partially
right. This word, which existed before it became a slur, but it becomes a slur at a very
distinct moment in US history, and that's as large numbers of black people begin to become
free, starting in the North in the 1820s. In other words, this word is fundamentally an
assault on black freedom, black mobility, and black aspiration. Even now, nothing so
swiftly unleashes an N-word tirade as a black person asserting their rights or going where
they please or prospering.

Think of the attacks on Colin Kaepernick when he kneeled. Or Barack Obama when he became
president. My students want to know this history. But when they ask questions, they're
shushed and shamed. By shying away from talking about the N-word, we have turned this word
into the ultimate taboo, crafting it into something so tantalizing, that for all US kids,
no matter their racial background, part of their coming of age is figuring out how to
negotiate this word. We treat conversations about it like sex before sex education. We're
squeamish, we silence them. So they learn about it from misinformed friends and in
whispers. I wish I could go back to the classroom that day and push through my fear to talk
about the fact that something actually happened. Not just to me or to my black students.
But to all of us. You know, I think we're all connected by our inability to talk about
this word. But what if we explored our points of encounter and did start to talk about
it? Today, I try to create the conditions in my classroom to have open and honest
conversations about it.

One of those conditions — not saying the word. We're able to talk about it because it
doesn't come into the classroom. Another important condition is I don't make my black
students responsible for teaching their classmates about this. That is my job. So I come
prepared. I hold the conversation with a tight rein, and I'm armed with knowledge of the
history. I always ask students the same question: Why is talking about the N-word hard?
Their answers are amazing. They're amazing. More than anything though, I have become
deeply acquainted with my own points of encounter, my personal history around this word.
Because when the N-word comes to school, or really anywhere, it brings with it all of the
complicated history of US racism. The nation's history and my own, right here, right now.
There's no avoiding it.

<!--
ad_duration=3.33
comment_count=34
event="TEDxEasthamptonWomen"
external_duration=0
external_start_time=0
has_talk_citation=1
intro_duration=11.82
is_subtitle_required="False"
is_talk_featured="True"
language="en"
language_swap="False"
native_language="en"
number_of_related_talks=6
number_of_speakers=1
number_of_subtitled_videos=8
number_of_tags=8
number_of_talk_download_languages=8
number_of_talk_more_resources=1
number_of_talk_recommendations=1
number_of_talks_take_actions=0
post_ad_duration=0.83
published_timestamp="2020-03-12 15:19:08"
recording_date="2019-12-14"
speaker_description="Historian"
speaker_is_published=1
speaker_name="Elizabeth Stordeur Pryor"
talk_name="Why it's so hard to talk about the N-word"
talk_recommendations_blurb="More resources curated by Elizabeth Stordeur Pryor"
talks_tags=["education","race","history","society","tedx","culture","communication","storytelling"]
talks_take_action=[]
url_audio="https://download.ted.com/talks/ElizabethStordeurPryor_2019X.mp3?apikey=acme-roadrunner"
url_photo_speaker="https://pe.tedcdn.com/images/ted/13314203b8afb5b81f08d2524894d13c34941008_254x191.jpg"
url_photo_talk="https://s3.amazonaws.com/talkstar-photos/uploads/9fc722a8-4660-4eea-ba0f-7dc137098ba5/ElizabethStordeurPryor_2019X-embed.jpg"
url_webpage="https://www.ted.com/talks/elizabeth_stordeur_pryor_why_it_s_so_hard_to_talk_about_the_n_word"
video_type_name="TEDx Talk"
-->