---
title: The way we think about biological sex is wrong
speaker: Emily Quinn
description: >-
 Did you know that almost 150 million people worldwide are born intersex -- with
 biology that doesn't fit the standard definition of male or female? (That's as
 many as the population of Russia.) At age 10, Emily Quinn found out she was
 intersex, and in this wise, funny talk, she shares eye-opening lessons from a
 life spent navigating society's thoughtless expectations, doctors who demanded
 she get unnecessary surgery -- and advocating for herself and the incredible
 variety that humans come in. (Contains mature content)
date: 2018-11-28
tags: ["human-body","sex","activism","biology","science","society","gender-spectrum","humanity","social-change","health"]
slug: emily_quinn_the_way_we_think_about_biological_sex_is_wrong
---

[This talk contains mature content]I have a vagina.

Just thought you should know. That might not come as a surprise to some of you. I look
like a woman. I'm dressed like one, I guess. The thing is, I also have balls. And it does
take a lot of nerve to come up here and talk to you about my genitalia. Just a little. But
I'm not talking about bravery or courage. I mean literally — I have balls. Right here,
right where a lot of you have ovaries. I'm not male or female. I'm intersex. Most people
assume that you're biologically either a man or a woman, but it's actually a lot more
complex than that. There are so many ways somebody could be intersex. In my case, it means
I was born with XY chromosomes, which you probably know as male chromosomes. And I was
born with a vagina and balls inside my body. I don't respond to testosterone, so during
puberty, I grew breasts, but I never got acne or body hair, body oil. You can be jealous
of that.

But even though I don't actually have a uterus — I was born without one, so I don't
menstruate, I can't have biological children. We put people in boxes based on their
genitalia. Before a baby's even born, we ask whether it's a boy or a girl, as if it
actually matters; as if you're going to be less excited about having a baby if it doesn't
have the genitals you wanted; as if what's between somebody's legs tells you anything
about that person. Are they kind, generous, funny? Smart? Who do they want to be when they
grow up? Genitals don't actually tell you anything. Yet, we define ourselves by them. In
this society, we love putting people into boxes and labeling each other. It kind of gives
us a sense of belonging and teaches us how to interact with one another. But there's one
really big problem: biological sex is not black or white. It's on a spectrum. Besides your
genitalia, you also have your chromosomes, your gonads, like ovaries or
testicles.

You have your internal sex organs, your hormone production, your hormone response and your
secondary sex characteristics, like breast development, body hair, etc. Those seven areas
of biological sex all have so much variation, yet we only get two options: male or female.
Which is kind of absurd to me, because I can't think of a single other human trait that
there's only two options for: skin color, hair, height, eyes. You can either have nose A
or nose B, that's it, no other options. If there are infinite ways for our bodies to look,
our minds to think, personalities to act, wouldn't it make sense that there's that much
variety in biological sex, too? Did you know that besides XX or XY chromosomes, you could
have XX and XY chromosomes? Or you could have an extra X — XXY. Or two extra — XXXY. Goes
on from there. And for those "normal" people with XX or XY, what does that mean? I have XY
chromosomes.

If my DNA is found at the scene of a crime — not saying it will, but, you know, we'll
see.

If my skeleton is discovered thousands of years from now, I'll be labeled male. Is that
the truth? My balls would say so. But what about the rest of me? And what if a woman has
ovarian cancer and has to have her ovaries removed? Does she still qualify as a woman?
What about other intersex people who are born without balls or ovaries or with just one or
a combination of the two? Where do they go? Do you have to have a uterus to be a woman?
There's a lot of us who are born without one. And everyone's favorite part, genitalia: you
either have one or the other, right? You either have a six-inch-long penis that's exactly
this thick, jutting straight out of the body at a 90-degree angle, or you have a vagina
that's this wide internally and a clitoris that's half an inch above the vaginal opening
and labia that look exactly like they're supposed to look like, according to that one porn
video you watched that one time. You know the one.

If you've been with more than one sexual partner in your lifetime, and you line them up,
one by one, I guarantee you can identify them just by their genitalia.

Think about it. Go on.

I see you. No judging. Just notice. All different, right? The sex and gender binary are
both so ingrained in our society, that we never stop to think about it. We just
automatically place each other into one box or the other, as if it actually matters. Until
somebody comes along to make you question it. And if you're thinking that I'm the
exception, an anomaly, an outlier: intersex people represent around two percent of the
population. That's the same percentage as genetic redheads. It's about 150 million people,
roughly, which is more than the entire population of Russia. So there's a lot of us,
needless to say. We're not new or rare. We're just invisible. We've existed throughout
every culture in history. Yet, we never talk about it. In fact, a lot of people might not
know that they're intersex. Have you had a karyotype test to determine your chromosomes?
What about a full blood panel for all of your hormone levels? A friend of mine found out
last year, in his 50s.

The executive director of interACT, which is the leading organization for intersex human
rights here in the US, she found out she was intersex at age 41. Her doctors found out
when she was 15, but they didn't tell her. They lied and said that she had cancer, because
that seemed like an easier option than finding out she wasn't "fully" a woman. This kind
of thing happens a lot, where intersex people are lied to or kept in the dark about our
bodies, which comes as a surprise to a lot of people. But we live in a society that
doesn't talk about sex or bodies at all, unless it's to mock or shame each other. I found
out I was intersex at age 10, and for the most part, I was fine with that information. It
didn't really faze me; I was still developing my understanding of the world. It wasn't
until I got older and realized I didn't fit society's expectations of me, that I didn't
belong, that I was abnormal. And that's when the shame started.

How many times have you seen kids play with the "wrong" toys for their gender? Or try on
the "wrong" clothes? All the time, right? Kids don't have these ideas about gender norm,
they don't have shame about who they're supposed to be or what they're supposed to like or
love. They don't care about any of this stuff. They don't have shame until we put it on
them. I also had doctors lie to me. At age 10, they told me that I would also get cancer
unless I removed my balls. Then they proceeded to tell me that every year. Until today,
there are still doctors who want me to remove them. But there's literally no reason. If a
typical XY male, like yourself, has testicles, and one is undescended, there's a high
chance of it becoming cancerous — or a higher chance of it becoming cancerous. They need
to thermoregulated. So they drop down away from the body to cool off, or they shrink back
up to get warm. Mine don't need to do that. They're not responding to testosterone,
they're not producing sperm.

They're fine right here inside my body. Yet, because there's such a lack of information
about intersex people, my doctors never understood the difference. They never really
understood my body. As I got older, I had another doctor tell me that I needed to have
surgery on my vagina. She said that until I had an operation, until she operated, I would
not be able to have "normal sex" with my husband one day. Her words. I didn't end up going
through with the operation, and I'm incredibly grateful for that. I'm not here to talk
about my sex life.

But let's just say it's fine.

I'm fine, my body is fine. You actually wouldn’t be able to tell the difference between me
and another person unless I told you; you wouldn't be able to tell that I was intersex
unless I told you. But again, because of the lack of understanding about bodies, my doctor
didn't understand the difference. And for the most part, my sex life is fine. The only
issue that really comes up is that sometimes, sexual situations bring up memories of
doctors touching me, over and over again since I was 10. I've been really lucky to escape
— I didn't think I would get emotional — I've been really lucky to escape the physical
harm that comes from these unnecessary surgeries. But no intersex person is free from the
emotional harm that comes from living in a society that tries to cover up your existence.
Most of my intersex friends have had operations like these. Oftentimes, they will remove
testes like mine, even though my risk of testicular cancer is lower than the risk of
breast cancer in a typical woman with no predisposition, no family history.

But we don't tell her to remove her breasts, do we? It's rare to meet an intersex person
that hasn't been operated on. Oftentimes, these surgeries are done to improve intersex
kids' lives, but they usually end up doing the opposite, causing more harm and
complications, both physical and emotional. I'm not saying that doctors are bad or evil.
It's just that we live in a society that causes some doctors to "fix" those of us who
don't fit their definition of normal. We're not problems that need to be fixed. We just
live in a society that needs to be enlightened. One of the ways I'm doing that is by
creating a genderless puberty guidebook that can teach kids about their bodies as they
grow up. Not their girl bodies or their boy bodies — just their bodies. We often place
unrealistic expectations on the things that our bodies do that are outside of our control.
I mean, if one man can grow a full, luxurious, hipster beard, and the other can only grow
a few mustache hairs, what does that mean about who they are as men?

Nothing. It literally, most likely, just means that their hair follicles respond to
testosterone in different ways. Yet, how many times have you heard a man ashamed about
something like this? Imagine a world where we could live in a society that teaches us not
to have shame about the things that our bodies do or do not do. I want to change the way
that we think about biological sex in this society — which is a lot to ask for. You could
say it's ballsy, I guess.

But eventually we accepted the world as round, right? We no longer diagnose gay people
with mental disorders or women with hysteria. We don't think epilepsy is caused by the
devil anymore, so that's cool.

We constantly change and evolve, the more we understand as a society. And biological sex
is on a spectrum. It's not black or white. Not only could that knowledge save intersex
kids from physical and emotional harm, I think it would help everyone else, too. Who here
has ever felt inadequate or ashamed because you weren't girly enough, you were too girly,
you weren't manly enough, or too manly? We constantly shame people for not fitting into a
box, but the reality is, I think we shame others because it prevents them from seeing that
we don't fit inside our boxes, either. And the truth is that nobody actually fits in a
box, because they don't exist. This binary, this false male-female facade is something we
constructed, we built ourselves. But it doesn't have to exist. We can break it down. And
that's what I want to do. Will you join me? Thanks.

<!--
ad_duration=3.33
comment_count=103
event="TEDWomen 2018"
external_start_time=0
has_talk_citation=0
intro_duration=11.82
is_subtitle_required="False"
is_talk_featured="True"
language="en"
language_swap="False"
native_language="en"
number_of_related_talks=6
number_of_speakers=1
number_of_subtitled_videos=22
number_of_tags=10
number_of_talk_download_languages=22
number_of_talk_more_resources=0
number_of_talk_recommendations=1
number_of_talks_take_actions=2
post_ad_duration=0.83
published_timestamp="2019-01-31 15:49:34"
recording_date="2018-11-28"
speaker_description="Artist, activist, author"
speaker_is_published=1
speaker_name="Emily Quinn"
talk_more_resources=[]
talk_name="The way we think about biological sex is wrong"
talk_recommendations_blurb="More resources curated by Emily Quinn"
talks_tags=["human-body","sex","activism","biology","science","society","gender-spectrum","humanity","social-change","health"]
url_audio="https://download.ted.com/talks/EmilyQuinn_2018W.mp3?apikey=acme-roadrunner"
url_photo_speaker="https://pe.tedcdn.com/images/ted/e76488ace85182c6ba7b2923e29c2e9253a6004a_254x191.jpg"
url_photo_talk="https://s3.amazonaws.com/talkstar-photos/uploads/ef77b50b-926a-4809-a417-94b1771b08fd/EmilyQuinn_2018W-embed.jpg"
url_webpage="https://www.ted.com/talks/emily_quinn_the_way_we_think_about_biological_sex_is_wrong"
video_type_name="TED Stage Talk"
-->