---
title: Your body was forged in the spectacular death of stars
speaker: Enrico Ramirez-Ruiz
description: >-
 We are all connected by the spectacular birth, death and rebirth of stars, says
 astrophysicist Enrico Ramirez-Ruiz. Journey through the cosmic history of the
 universe as Ramirez-Ruiz explains how supernovas forged the elements of life to
 create everything from the air you breathe to the very atoms that make you.
date: 2019-11-01
tags: ["astronomy","science","universe","human-origins","human-body","cosmos","humanity","visualizations","space","solar-system"]
slug: enrico_ramirez_ruiz_your_body_was_forged_in_the_spectacular_death_of_stars
---

We are all atomically connected. Fundamentally, universally. But what does that mean? I'm
an astrophysicist, and as such, it is my responsibility to trace the cosmic history of
every single one of your atoms. In fact, I would say that one of the greatest achievements
of modern astronomy is the understanding of how our atoms were actually put together.
While hydrogen and helium were made during the first two minutes of the big bang, the
origin of heavy elements, such as the iron in your blood, the oxygen we're breathing, the
silicone in your computers, lies in the life cycle of stars. Nuclear reactions take lighter
elements and transform them into heavier ones, and that causes stars to shine and
ultimately explode, therefore enriching the universe with these heavy elements. So without
stellar death there would be no oxygen or other elements heavier than hydrogen and helium,
and therefore, there would be no life. There are more atoms in our bodies than stars in
the universe.

And these atoms are extremely durable. The origins of our atoms can be traceable to stars
that manufactured them in their interiors and exploded them all across the Milky Way,
billions of years ago. And I should know this, because I am indeed a certified stellar
mortician.

And today, I want to take you on a journey that starts in a supernova explosion and ends
with the air that we're breathing right now. So what is our body made of? Ninety-six
percent consists of only four elements: hydrogen, carbon, oxygen and nitrogen. Now the
main character of this cosmic tale is oxygen. Not only is the vast majority of our bodies
made of oxygen, but oxygen is the one element fighting to protect life on earth. The vast
majority of oxygen in the universe was indeed produced over the entire history of the
universe in these supernova explosions. These supernova explosions signal the demise of
very massive stars. And for a brilliant month, one supernova explosion can be brighter
than an entire galaxy containing billions of stars. That is truly remarkable. That is
because massive stars burn brighter and have a spectacular death, compared to other stars.
Nuclear fusion is really the lifeblood of all stars, including the sun, and as a result is
the root source of all the energy on earth.

You can think of stars as these fusion factories which are powered by smashing atoms
together in their hot and dense interiors. Now, stars like our sun, which are relatively
small, burn hydrogen into helium, but heavier stars of about eight times the mass of the
sun continue this burning cycle even after they exhausted their helium in their cores. So
at this point, the massive star is left with a carbon core, which, as you know, is the
building block of life. This carbon core continues to collapse and as a result, the
temperature increases, which allows further nuclear reactions to take place, and carbon
then burns into oxygen, into neon, silicon, sulphur and ultimately iron. And iron is the
end. Why? Because iron is the most bound nuclei in the universe, which means that we
cannot extract energy by burning iron. So when the entire core of the massive star is made
of iron, it's run out of fuel.

And that's an incredibly bad day for a star.

Without fuel, it cannot generate heat, and therefore gravity has won the battle. The iron
core has no other choice but to collapse, reaching incredibly high densities. Think of 300
million tons reduced to a space the size of a sugar cube. At these extreme high densities,
the core actually resists collapse, and as a result, all of this infalling material
bounces off the core. And this dramatic bounce, which happens in a fraction of a second or
so, is responsible for ejecting the rest of the star in all directions, ultimately forming
a supernova explosion. So, sadly, from the perspective of an astrophysicist, the
conditions in the centers of these exploding stars cannot be recreated in a
laboratory.

Now, thankfully for humanity, we're not able to do that.

But what does that mean? That means that as astrophysicists, we have to rely on
sophisticated computer simulations in order to understand these complex phenomena. These
simulations can be used to really understand how gas behaves under such extreme
conditions. And can be used to answer fundamental questions like, "What ultimately
disrupted the massive star?" "How is it that this implosion can be reversed into an
explosion?" There's a huge amount of debate in the field, but we all agree that neutrinos,
which are these elusive elementary particles, play a crucial role. Yeah? I'm about to show
you one of those simulations. So neutrinos are produced in huge numbers once the core
collapses. And in fact, they are responsible for transferring the energy in this core.
Like thermal radiation in a heater, neutrinos pump energy into the core, increasing the
possibility of disrupting the star. In fact, for about a fraction of a second, neutrinos
pump so much energy that the pressure increases high enough that a shock wave is produced
and the shock wave goes and disrupts the entire star.

And it is in that shock wave where elements are produced. So thank you,
neutrinos.

Supernovas shine bright, and for a brief period of time, they radiate more energy than the
sun will in its entire lifetime. That point of light that you see there, which was
certainly not there before, burns like a beacon, clearly indicating the position where the
massive star has died. In a galaxy like our own Milky Way, we estimate that about once
every 50 years, a massive star dies. This implies that somewhere in the universe, there's
a supernova explosion every second or so. And thankfully for astronomers, some of them are
actually found relatively close to earth. Various civilizations recorded these supernova
explosions long before the telescope was invented. The most famous of all of them is
probably the supernova explosion that gave rise to the Crab Nebula. Yeah? Korean and
Chinese astronomers recorded this supernova in 1054, as did, almost certainly, Native
Americans. This supernova happened about 5,600 light-years away from earth.

And it was so incredibly bright that astronomers could see it during the day. And it was
visible to the naked eye for about two years in the night sky. Fast forward 1,000 years or
so later, and what do we see? We see these filaments that were blasted by the explosion,
moving at 300 miles per second. These filaments are essential for us to understand how
massive stars die. The image that you see there was assembled by the Hubble Space
Telescope over a span of three months. And it is incredibly important to astronomers
because it ultimately carries the chemical legacy of the star that exploded. The orange
filaments that you see there are the tattered remains of the star, and are made primarily
of hydrogen, while the blue and red filaments that you see are the freshly synthesized
oxygen. So studying supernova remnants, like the Crab Nebula, allowed astronomers to
firmly conclude that the vast majority of oxygen on earth was produced by supernova
explosions over the history of the universe.

And we can estimate that in order to assemble all the atoms of oxygen in our body, it took
on the order of a 100 million supernova. So every bit of you, or at least the majority of
it, came from one of these supernova explosions. So now you may be wondering, how is it
that these atoms that were generated in such extreme conditions ultimately took residence
in our body? So I want you to follow the thought experiment. Imagine that we're in the
Milky Way, and a supernova happens. It blasted tons and tons of oxygen atoms almost into
empty space. A few of them were able to be assembled in a cloud. Now, 4.5 billion years
ago, something unsettled that cloud and caused it to collapse, forming the sun in its
center and the solar system. So the sun, the planets and life on earth depend on this
beautiful cycle of stellar birth, stellar death and stellar rebirth. And this continues
the recycling of atoms in the universe.

And as a result, astronomy and chemistry are intimately connected. We are life forms that
have evolved to inhale the waste products of plants. But now you know that we also inhale
the waste products of supernova explosions.

So take a moment, inhale. An oxygen atom has just gone into your body. It is certain that
that oxygen [atom] remembers that it was in the interior of a star and it was probably
manufactured by a supernova explosion. This atom may have traveled the entire solar system
until it splashed on earth, long before reaching you. When we breathe, we use hundreds of
liters of oxygen every day. So I'm incredibly lucky to be standing in front of this
beautiful audience, but I'm actually stealing your oxygen atoms.

And because I'm speaking to you, I'm giving you some of them back, that once resided in
me. So breathing, yeah, participates in this beautiful exchange of atoms. And you can then
ask, "Well, how many atoms in our body once belonged to Frida Kahlo?"

About 100,000 of them. 100,000 more probably belonged to Marie Curie, 100,000 more to
Sally Ride, or whoever you want to think of. So breathing is not only filling our lungs
with cosmic history, but with human history. I would like to end my talk by sharing a myth
that is very close to my heart. A myth from the Chichimeca culture, which is a very
powerful Mesoamerican culture. And the Chichimecas believe that our essence was assembled
in the heavens. And on its journey towards us, it actually fragmented into tons of
different pieces. So my abuelo used to say, "One of the reasons you feel incomplete is
because you are missing your pieces."

"But don't be fooled by that. You've been given an incredible opportunity of growth. Why?
Because it's not like those pieces were scattered on earth and you have to go and pick
them up. No, those pieces fell into other people. And only by sharing them you will become
more complete. Yes, during your life, there's going to be individuals that have these huge
pieces that make you feel whole. But in your quest of being complete, you have to treasure
and share every single one of those pieces."Sounds a lot like the story of oxygen to
me.

Which started in the heavens in a supernova explosion, and continues today, within the
confines of our humanity. Our atoms in our body have embarked on an epic odyssey, with
time spans from billions of years to mere centuries, all leading to you, all of you,
witnesses of the universe. Thank you.

<!--
ad_duration=3.33
comment_count=13
event="TED@NAS"
external_start_time=0
has_talk_citation=1
intro_duration=11.82
is_subtitle_required="False"
is_talk_featured="True"
language="en"
language_swap="False"
native_language="en"
number_of_related_talks=6
number_of_speakers=1
number_of_subtitled_videos=16
number_of_tags=10
number_of_talk_download_languages=16
number_of_talk_more_resources=1
number_of_talk_recommendations=1
number_of_talks_take_actions=1
post_ad_duration=0.83
published_timestamp="2019-12-17 16:05:36"
recording_date="2019-11-01"
speaker_description="Astrophyscist, stellar mortician"
speaker_is_published=1
speaker_name="Enrico Ramirez-Ruiz"
talk_name="Your body was forged in the spectacular death of stars"
talk_recommendations_blurb="More resources curated by Enrico Ramirez-Ruiz"
talks_tags=["astronomy","science","universe","human-origins","human-body","cosmos","humanity","visualizations","space","solar-system"]
url_audio="https://download.ted.com/talks/EnricoRamirezRuiz_2019S.mp3?apikey=acme-roadrunner"
url_photo_speaker="https://pe.tedcdn.com/images/ted/461262e7952a5b6082749b237b4f51f24402ca2f_254x191.jpg"
url_photo_talk="https://s3.amazonaws.com/talkstar-photos/uploads/29b0700e-45e8-46af-b66c-e0b748e2b24b/EnricoRamirez-Ruiz_2019S-embed.jpg"
url_webpage="https://www.ted.com/talks/enrico_ramirez_ruiz_your_body_was_forged_in_the_spectacular_death_of_stars"
video_type_name="TED Institute Talk"
-->