---
title: There's no such thing as not voting
speaker: Eric Liu
description: >-
 Many people like to talk about how important voting is, how it's your civic duty
 and responsibility as an adult. Eric Liu agrees with all that, but he also thinks
 it's time to bring joy back to the ballot box. The former political speechwriter
 details how he and his team are fostering the culture around voting in the 2016
 US presidential election -- and closes with a powerful analysis of why anyone
 eligible should show up on Election Day.
date: 2016-09-07
tags: ["communication","collaboration","community","democracy","government","entertainment","history","identity","inequality","politics","performance-art","society","tednyc"]
slug: eric_liu_there_s_no_such_thing_as_not_voting
---

Why bother? The game is rigged. My vote won't count. The choices are terrible. Voting is
for suckers. Perhaps you've thought some of these things. Perhaps you've even said them.
And if so, you wouldn't be alone, and you wouldn't be entirely wrong. The game of public
policy today is rigged in many ways. How else would more than half of federal tax breaks
flow up to the wealthiest five percent of Americans? And our choices indeed are often
terrible. For many people across the political spectrum, Exhibit A is the 2016
presidential election. But in any year, you can look up and down the ballot and find
plenty to be uninspired about. But in spite of all this, I still believe voting matters.
And crazy as it may sound, I believe we can revive the joy of voting. Today, I want to
talk about how we can do that, and why. There used to be a time in American history when
voting was fun, when it was much more than just a grim duty to show up at the
polls.

That time is called "most of American history."

From the Revolution to the Civil Rights Era, the United States had a vibrant, robustly
participatory and raucous culture of voting. It was street theater, open-air debates,
fasting and feasting and toasting, parades and bonfires. During the 19th century,
immigrants and urban political machines helped fuel this culture of voting. That culture
grew with each successive wave of new voters. During Reconstruction, when new
African-American voters, new African-American citizens, began to exercise their power,
they celebrated in jubilee parades that connected emancipation with their newfound right
to vote. A few decades later, the suffragettes brought a spirit of theatricality to their
fight, marching together in white dresses as they claimed the franchise. And the Civil
Rights Movement, which sought to redeem the promise of equal citizenship that had been
betrayed by Jim Crow, put voting right at the center.

From Freedom Summer to the march in Selma, that generation of activists knew that voting
matters, and they knew that spectacle and the performance of power is key to actually
claiming power. But it's been over a half century since Selma and the Voting Rights Act,
and in the decades since, this face-to-face culture of voting has just about disappeared.
It's been killed by television and then the internet. The couch has replaced the commons.
Screens have made citizens into spectators. And while it's nice to share political memes
on social media, that's a rather quiet kind of citizenship. It's what the sociologist
Sherry Turkle calls "being alone together."What we need today is an electoral culture that
is about being together together, in person, in loud and passionate ways, so that instead
of being "eat your vegetables" or "do you duty," voting can feel more like "join the club"
or, better yet, "join the party."Imagine if we had, across the country right now, in local
places but nationwide, a concerted effort to revive a face-to-face set of ways to engage
and electioneer: outdoor shows in which candidates and their causes are mocked and praised
in broad satirical style; soapbox speeches by citizens; public debates held inside pubs;
streets filled with political art and handmade posters and murals; battle of the band
concerts in which competing performers rep their candidates.

Now, all of this may sound a little bit 18th century to you, but in fact, it doesn't have
to be any more 18th century than, say, Broadway's "Hamilton," which is to say vibrantly
contemporary. And the fact is that all around the world, today, millions of people are
voting like this. In India, elections are colorful, communal affairs. In Brazil, election
day is a festive, carnival-type atmosphere. In Taiwan and Hong Kong, there is a spectacle,
eye-popping, eye-grabbing spectacle to the street theater of elections. You might ask,
well, here in America, who has time for this? And I would tell you that the average
American watches five hours of television a day. You might ask, who has the motivation?
And I'll tell you, any citizen who wants to be seen and heard not as a prop, not as a
talking point, but as a participant, as a creator. Well, how do we make this happen? Simply
by making it happen. That's why a group of colleagues and I launched a new project called
"The Joy of Voting." In four cities across the United States — Philadelphia, Miami, Akron,
Ohio, and Wichita, Kansas — we've gathered together artists and activists, educators,
political folks, neighbors, everyday citizens to come together and create projects that
can foster this culture of voting in a local way. In Miami, that means all-night parties
with hot DJs where the only way to get in is to show that you're registered to
vote.

In Akron, it means political plays being performed in the bed of a flatbed truck that
moves from neighborhood to neighborhood. In Philadelphia, it's a voting-themed scavenger
hunt all throughout colonial old town. And in Wichita, it's making mixtapes and live
graffiti art in the North End to get out the vote. There are 20 of these projects, and
they are remarkable in their beauty and their diversity, and they are changing people. Let
me tell you about a couple of them. In Miami, we've commissioned and artist, a young artist
named Atomico, to create some vivid and vibrant images for a new series of "I voted"
stickers. But the thing is, Atomico had never voted. He wasn't even registered. So as he
got to work on creating this artwork for these stickers, he also began to get over his
sense of intimidation about politics. He got himself registered, and then he got educated
about the upcoming primary election, and on election day he was out there not just passing
out stickers, but chatting up voters and encouraging people to vote, and talking about the
election with passersby. In Akron, a theater company called the Wandering Aesthetics has
been putting on these pickup truck plays.

And to do so, they put out an open call to the public asking for speeches, monologues,
dialogues, poems, snippets of anything that could be read aloud and woven into a
performance. They got dozens of submissions. One of them was a poem written by nine
students in an ESL class, all of them Hispanic migrant workers from nearby Hartville,
Ohio. I want to read to you from this poem. It's called "The Joy of Voting.""I would like
to vote for the first time because things are changing for Hispanics. I used to be afraid
of ghosts. Now I am afraid of people. There's more violence and racism. Voting can change
this. The border wall is nothing. It's just a wall. The wall of shame is something. It's
very important to vote so we can break down this wall of shame. I have passion in my
heart. Voting gives me a voice and power. I can stand up and do something.""The Joy of
Voting" project isn't just about joy. It's about this passion.

It's about feeling and belief, and it isn't just our organization's work. All across this
country right now, immigrants, young people, veterans, people of all different backgrounds
are coming together to create this kind of passionate, joyful activity around elections,
in red and blue states, in urban and rural communities, people of every political
background. What they have in common is simply this: their work is rooted in place. Because
remember, all citizenship is local. When politics becomes just a presidential election, we
yell and we scream at our screens, and then we collapse, exhausted. But when politics is
about us and our neighbors and other people in our community coming together to create
experiences of collective voice and imagination, then we begin to remember that this stuff
matters. We begin to remember that this is the stuff of self-government. Which brings me
back to where I began. Why bother? There's one way to answer this question.

Voting matters because it is a self-fulfilling act of belief. It feeds the spirit of
mutual interest that makes any society thrive. When we vote, even if it is in anger, we
are part of a collective, creative leap of faith. Voting helps us generate the very power
that we wish we had. It's no accident that democracy and theater emerged around the same
time in ancient Athens. Both of them yank the individual out of the enclosure of her
private self. Both of them create great public experiences of shared ritual. Both of them
bring the imagination to life in ways that remind us that all of our bonds in the end are
imagined, and can be reimagined. This moment right now, when we think about the meaning of
imagination, is so fundamentally important, and our ability to take that spirit and to
take that sense that there is something greater out there, is not just a matter of
technical expertise. It's not just a matter of making the time or having the
know-how.

It is a matter of spirit. But let me give you an answer to this question, "Why bother?"
that is maybe a little less spiritual and a bit more pointed. Why bother voting? Because
there is no such thing as not voting. Not voting is voting, for everything that you may
detest and oppose. Not voting can be dressed up as an act of principled, passive
resistance, but in fact not voting is actively handing power over to those whose interests
are counter to your own, and those who would be very glad to take advantage of your
absence. Not voting is for suckers. Imagine where this country would be if all the folks
who in 2010 created the Tea Party had decided that, you know, politics is too messy,
voting is too complicated. There is no possibility of our votes adding up to anything.
They didn't preemptively silence themselves. They showed up, and in the course of showing
up, they changed American politics.

Imagine if all of the followers of Donald Trump and Bernie Sanders had decided not to
upend the political status quo and blow apart the frame of the previously possible in
American politics. They did that by voting. We live in a time right now, divided, often
very dark, where across the left and the right, there's a lot of talk of revolution and
the need for revolution to disrupt everyday democracy. Well, here's the thing: everyday
democracy already gives us a playbook for revolution. In the 2012 presidential election,
young voters, Latino voters, Asian-American voters, low-income voters, all showed up at
less than 50 percent. In the 2014 midterm elections, turnout was 36 percent, which was a
70-year low. And in your average local election, turnout hovers somewhere around 20
percent. I invite you to imagine 100 percent. Picture 100 percent. Mobilize 100 percent,
and overnight, we get revolution.

Overnight, the policy priorities of this country change dramatically, and every level of
government becomes radically more responsive to all the people. What would it take to
mobilize 100 percent? Well, we do have to push back against efforts afoot all across the
country right now to make voting harder. But at the same time, we have to actively create
a positive culture of voting that people want to belong to, be part of, and experience
together. We have to make purpose. We have to make joy. So yes, let's have that revolution,
a revolution of spirit, of ideas, of policy and participation, a revolution against
cynicism, a revolution against the self-fulfilling sense of powerlessness. Let's vote this
revolution into existence, and while we're at it, let's have some fun. Thank you very
much.

<!--
ad_duration=3.33
comment_count=76
event="TEDNYC"
external_start_time=0
has_talk_citation=1
intro_duration=11.82
is_subtitle_required="False"
is_talk_featured="True"
language="en"
language_swap="False"
native_language="en"
number_of_related_talks=6
number_of_speakers=1
number_of_subtitled_videos=24
number_of_tags=13
number_of_talk_download_languages=24
number_of_talk_more_resources=0
number_of_talk_recommendations=1
number_of_talks_take_actions=2
post_ad_duration=0.83
published_timestamp="2016-09-19 15:03:54"
recording_date="2016-09-07"
speaker_description="Civic evangelist, author"
speaker_is_published=1
speaker_name="Eric Liu"
talk_more_resources=[]
talk_name="There's no such thing as not voting"
talk_recommendations_blurb="Check out these resources on voting and the Joy of Voting project, curated by Eric Liu."
talks_tags=["communication","collaboration","community","democracy","government","entertainment","history","identity","inequality","politics","performance-art","society","tednyc"]
url_audio="https://download.ted.com/talks/EricLiu_2016S.mp3?apikey=acme-roadrunner"
url_photo_speaker="https://pe.tedcdn.com/images/ted/19b7be676df92de097575648d69e9bc0128fffc5_254x191.jpg"
url_photo_talk="https://s3.amazonaws.com/talkstar-photos/uploads/cebb3b64-496b-4f31-b6c0-35e741234615/EricLiu_2016S-embed.jpg"
url_webpage="https://www.ted.com/talks/eric_liu_there_s_no_such_thing_as_not_voting"
video_type_name="TED Stage Talk"
-->