---
title: What's really happening at the US-Mexico border -- and how we can do better
speaker: Erika Pinheiro
description: >-
 At the US-Mexico border, policies of prolonged detention and family separation
 have made seeking asylum in the United States difficult and dangerous. In this
 raw and heartfelt talk, immigration attorney Erika Pinheiro offers a glimpse into
 her daily work on both sides of the border and shares some of the stories behind
 the statistics -- including her own story of being detained and separated from
 her son. It's a clear-eyed call to remember the humanity that's impacted by
 policy -- and a warning: "History shows us that the first population to be
 vilified and stripped of their rights is rarely the last," she says.
date: 2019-09-10
tags: ["immigration","policy","refugees","law","government","social-change","society","justice-system"]
slug: erika_pinheiro_what_s_really_happening_at_the_us_mexico_border_and_how_we_can_do_better
---

Twice a week, I drive from my home near Tijuana, Mexico, over the US border, to my office
in San Diego. The stark contrast between the poverty and desperation on one side of the
border and the conspicuous wealth on the other always feels jarring. But what makes this
contrast feel even starker is when I pass by the building that those of us who work on the
border unaffectionately refer to as the black hole. The black hole is the Customs and
Border Protection, or CBP facility, at the San Ysidro port of entry, right next to a
luxury outlet mall. It's also where, at any one time, there's likely 800 immigrants locked
in freezing, filthy, concrete cells below the building. Up top: shopping bags and
frappuccinos. Downstairs: the reality of the US immigration system. And it's where, one
day in September of 2018, I found myself trying to reach Anna, a woman who CBP had
recently separated from her seven-year-old son. I'm an immigration attorney and the policy
and litigation director of Al Otro Lado, a binational nonprofit helping immigrants on both
sides of the US-Mexico border.

We'd met Anna several weeks earlier at our Tijuana office, where she explained that she
feared she and her son would be killed in Mexico. So we prepared her for the process of
turning herself over to CBP to ask for asylum. A few days after she'd gone to the port of
entry to ask for help, we received a frantic phone call from her family members in the
United States, telling us that CBP officials had taken Anna's son from her. Now, not that
this should matter, but I knew that Anna's son had special needs. And once again, this
news filled me with the sense of panic and foreboding that has unfortunately become a
hallmark of my daily work. I had a signed authorization to act as Anna's attorney, so I
rushed over to the port of entry to see if I could speak with my client. Not only would
CBP officials not let me speak to Anna, but they wouldn't even tell me if she was there. I
went from supervisor to supervisor, begging to submit evidence of Anna's son's special
needs, but no one would even talk to me about the case.

It felt surreal to watch the shoppers strolling idly by what felt like a life-and-death
situation. After several hours of being stonewalled by CBP, I left. Several days later, I
found Anna's son in the foster-care system. But I didn't know what happened to Anna until
over a week later, when she turned up at a detention camp a few miles east. Now, Anna
didn't have a criminal record, and she followed the law when asking for asylum. Still,
immigration officials held her for three more months, until we could win her release and
help her reunify with her son. Anna's story is not the only story I could tell you. There's
Mateo, an 18-month-old boy, who was ripped from his father's arms and sent to a government
shelter thousands of miles away, where they failed to properly bathe him for months.
There's Amadou, an unaccompanied African child, who was held with adults for 28 days in
CBP's horrific facilities.

Most disturbingly, there's Maria, a pregnant refugee who begged for medical attention for
eight hours before she miscarried in CBP custody. CBP officials held her for three more
weeks before they sent her back to Mexico, where she is being forced to wait months for an
asylum hearing in the United States. Seeing these horrors day in and day out has changed
me. I used to be fun at parties, but now, I inevitably find myself telling people about
how our government tortures refugees at the border and in the detention camps. Now, people
try to change the subject and congratulate me for the great work I'm doing in helping
people like Anna. But I don't know how to make them understand that unless they start
fighting, harder than they ever thought possible, we don't know which of us will be the
next to suffer Anna's fate. Trump's mass separations of refugee families at the southern
border shocked the conscience of the world and woke many to the cruelties of the US
immigration system.

It seems like today, more people than ever are involved in the fight for immigrant rights.
But unfortunately, the situation is just not getting better. Thousands protested to end
family separations, but the government is still separating families. More than 900
children have been taken from their parents since June of 2018. Thousands more refugee
children have been taken from their grandparents, siblings and other family members at the
border. Since 2017, at least two dozen people have died in immigration custody. And more
will die, including children. Now, we lawyers can and will keep filing lawsuits to stop
the government from brutalizing our clients, but we can't keep tinkering around the edges
of the law if we want migrants to be treated humanely. This administration would have you
believe that we have to separate families and we have to detain children, because it will
stop more refugees from coming to our borders. But we know that this isn't
true.

In fact, in 2019, the number of apprehensions at our southern border has actually gone up.
And we tell people every day at the border, "If you seek asylum in the United States, you
risk family separation, and you risk being detained indefinitely." But for many of them,
the alternative is even worse. People seek refuge in the United States for a lot of
different reasons. In Tijuana, we've met refugees from over 50 countries, speaking 14
different languages. We meet LGBT migrants from all over the world who have never been in
a country in which they feel safe. We meet women from all over the world whose own
governments refuse to protect them from brutal domestic violence or repressive social
norms. Of course, we meet Central American families who are fleeing gang violence. But we
also meet Russian dissidents, Venezuelan activists, Christians from China, Muslims from
China, and thousands and thousands of other refugees fleeing all types of persecution and
torture. Now, a lot of these people would qualify as refugees under the international legal
definition.

The Refugee Convention was created after World War II to give protection to people fleeing
persecution based on their race, religion, nationality, political opinion or membership in
a particular social group. But even those who would be refugees under the international
definition are not going to win asylum in the United States. And that's because since
2017, the US Attorneys General have made sweeping changes to asylum law, to make sure that
less people qualify for protection in the United States. Now these laws are mostly aimed
at Central Americans and keeping them out of the country, but they affect other types of
refugees as well. The result is that the US frequently deports refugees to their
persecution and death. The US is also using detention to try to deter refugees and make it
harder for them to win their cases. Today, there are over 55,000 immigrants detained in
the United States, many in remote detention facilities, far from any type of legal help.
And this is very important.

Because it's civil and not criminal detention, there is no public defender system, so most
detained immigrants are not going to have an attorney to help them with their cases. An
immigrant who has an attorney is up to 10 times more likely to win their case than one who
doesn't. And as you've seen, I hate to be the bearer of bad news, but the situation is even
worse for refugee families today than it was during family separation. Since January of
2019, the US has implemented a policy that's forced over 40,000 refugees to wait in Mexico
for asylum hearings in the United States. These refugees, many of whom are families, are
trapped in some of the most dangerous cities in the world, where they're being raped,
kidnapped and extorted by criminal groups. And if they survive for long enough to make it
to their asylum hearing, less than one percent of them are able to find an attorney to
help them with their cases.

The US government will point to the lowest asylum approval rates to argue that these
people are not really refugees, when in fact, US asylum law is an obstacle course designed
to make them fail. Now not every migrant at the border is a refugee. I meet plenty of
economic migrants. For example, people who want to go to the United States to work, to pay
medical bills for a parent or school fees for a child back home. Increasingly, I'm also
meeting climate refugees. In particular, I'm meeting a lot of indigenous Central Americans
who can no longer sustain themselves by farming, due to catastrophic drought in the
region. We know that today, people are migrating because of climate change, and that more
will do so in the future, but we simply don't have a legal system to deal with this type
of migration. So, it would make sense, as a start, to expand the refugee definition to
include climate refugees, for example.

But those of us in a position to advocate for those changes are too busy suing our
government to keep the meager legal protections that refugees enjoy under the current law.
And we are exhausted, and it's almost too late to help. And we know now that this isn't
America's problem alone. From Australia's brutal offshore detention camps to Italy's
criminalization of aid to migrants drowning in the Mediterranean, first-world countries
have gone to deadly lengths to keep refugees from reaching our shores. But they've done
more than restrict the refugee definition. They've created parallel, fascist-style legal
systems in which migrants have none of the rights that form the basis of a democracy, the
alleged foundation of the countries in which they're seeking refuge. History shows us that
the first group to be vilified and stripped of their rights is rarely the last, and many
Americans and Europeans seem to accept an opaque and unjust legal system for noncitizens,
because they think they are immune.

But eventually, these authoritarian ideals bleed over and affect citizens as well. I
learned this firsthand when the US government placed me on an illegal watch list for my
work helping immigrants at the border. One day, in January of 2019, I was leaving my
office in San Diego and crossing the border to go back to my home in Mexico. Mexican
officials, although they had given me a valid visa, stopped me and told me that I couldn't
enter the country because a foreign government had placed a travel alert on my passport,
designating me as a national security risk. I was detained and interrogated in a filthy
room for hours. I begged the Mexican officials to let me go back to Mexico and pick up my
son, who was only 10 months old at the time. But they refused, and instead, they turned me
over to CBP officials, where I was forced back into the United States. It took me weeks to
get another visa so that I could go back to Mexico, and I went to the border, visa in
hand.

But again, I was detained and interrogated because there was still a travel alert on my
passport. Shortly after, leaked internal CBP documents confirmed that my own government
had been complicit in issuing this travel alert against me. And since then, I haven't
traveled to any other countries, because I'm afraid I'll be detained and deported from
those countries as well. These travel restrictions, detentions and separation from my
infant son are things I never thought I would experience as a US citizen, but I'm far from
the only person being criminalized for helping immigrants. The US and other countries have
made it a crime to save lives, and those of us who are simply trying to do our jobs are
being forced to choose between our humanity and our freedom. And the thing that makes me
so desperate is that all of you are facing the same choice, but you don't understand it
yet. And I know there are good people out there. I saw thousands of you in the streets,
protesting family separation.

And that largely helped bring about an end to the official policy. But we know that the
government is still separating children. And things are actually getting worse. Today, the
US government is fighting for the right to detain refugee children indefinitely in prison
camps. This isn't over. We cannot allow ourselves to become numb or look away. Those of us
who are citizens of countries whose policies cause detention, separation and death, need
to very quickly decide which side we're on. We need to demand that our laws respect the
inherent dignity of all human beings, especially refugees seeking help at our borders, but
including economic migrants and climate refugees. We need to demand that refugees get a
fair shot at seeking protection in our countries by ensuring that they have access to
council and by creating independent courts that are not subject to the political whims of
the president. I know it's overwhelming, and I know this sounds cliché, but
...

we need to call our elected representatives and demand these changes. I know you've heard
this before, but have you made the call? We know these calls make a difference. The
dystopian immigration systems being built up in first-world countries are a test of
citizens to see how far you're willing to let the government go in taking away other
people's rights when you think it won't happen to you. But when you let the government
take people's children without due process and detain people indefinitely without access
to council, you are failing the test. What's happening to immigrants now is a preview of
where we're all headed if we fail to act. Thank you.

<!--
ad_duration=3.33
comment_count=38
event="TED Salon Border Stories"
external_start_time=0
has_talk_citation=1
intro_duration=11.82
is_subtitle_required="False"
is_talk_featured="True"
language="en"
language_swap="False"
native_language="en"
number_of_related_talks=6
number_of_speakers=1
number_of_subtitled_videos=13
number_of_tags=8
number_of_talk_download_languages=13
number_of_talk_more_resources=0
number_of_talk_recommendations=1
number_of_talks_take_actions=0
post_ad_duration=0.83
published_timestamp="2019-11-14 15:57:22"
recording_date="2019-09-10"
speaker_description="Immigration attorney"
speaker_is_published=1
speaker_name="Erika Pinheiro"
talk_more_resources=[]
talk_name="What's really happening at the US-Mexico border -- and how we can do better"
talk_recommendations_blurb="More resources curated by Erika Pinheiro"
talks_tags=["immigration","policy","refugees","law","government","social-change","society","justice-system"]
talks_take_action=[]
url_audio="https://download.ted.com/talks/ErikaPinheiro_2019S.mp3?apikey=acme-roadrunner"
url_photo_speaker="https://pe.tedcdn.com/images/ted/52065cf9014fbb7760af8de2a03ab19f55eedc60_254x191.jpg"
url_photo_talk="https://s3.amazonaws.com/talkstar-photos/uploads/6609eebb-88ae-4f4c-a22c-e3861bea8e88/ErikaPinheiro_2019S-embed.jpg"
url_webpage="https://www.ted.com/talks/erika_pinheiro_what_s_really_happening_at_the_us_mexico_border_and_how_we_can_do_better"
video_type_name="TED Stage Talk"
-->