---
title: What everyday citizens can do to claim power on the internet
speaker: Fadi Chehadé and Bryn Freedman
description: >-
 Technology architect Fadi Chehadé helped set up the infrastructure that makes the
 internet work -- essential things like the domain name system and IP address
 standards. Today he's focused on finding ways for society to benefit from
 technology. In a crisp conversation with Bryn Freedman, curator of the TED
 Institute, Chehadé discusses the ongoing war between the West and China over
 artificial intelligence, how tech companies can become stewards of the power they
 have to shape lives and economies and what everyday citizens can do to claim
 power on the internet.
date: 2018-09-20
tags: ["internet","future","economics","humanity","society","community","technology"]
slug: fadi_chehade_and_bryn_freedman_what_everyday_citizens_can_do_to_claim_power_on_the_internet
---

Bryn Freedman: So you said that in the 20th century, global power was in the hands of
government. At the beginning of this digital century, it really moved to corporations and
that in the future, it would move to individuals. And I've interviewed a lot of people,
and they say you're wrong, and they are betting on the companies. So why are you right,
and why are individuals going to win out? Fadi Chehadé: Because companies cater to
individuals, and we as the citizenry need to start understanding that we have a big role
in shaping how the world will be governed, moving forward. Yes, indeed, the tug of war
right now is between governments, who lost much of their power to companies because the
internet is not built around the nation-state system around which governments have power.
The internet is transnational. It's not international, and it's not national, and
therefore the companies became very powerful. They shape our economy. They shape our
society. Governments don't know what to do.

Right now, they're reacting. And I fear that if we do not, as the citizenry — which are,
in my opinion, the most important leg of that stool — don't take our role, then you are
right. The detractors, or the people telling you that businesses will prevail, are right.
It will happen. BF: So are you saying that individuals will force businesses or business
will be forced to be responsive, or is there a fear that they won't be? FC: I think they
will be. Look at two weeks ago, a small company called Skip winning over Uber and Lyft and
everyone to actually get the license for the San Francisco scooter business. And if you
read why did Skip win, because Skip listened to the people of San Francisco, who were
tired of scooters being thrown everywhere, and actually went to the city and said, "We
will deploy the service, but we will respond to the people's requirements that we organize
ourselves around a set of rules." They self-governed their behavior, and they won the
contract over some very powerful companies. BF: So speaking of guidelines and
self-governance, you've spent an entire lifetime creating guidelines and norms for the
internet.

Do you think those days are over? Who is going to guide, who is going to control, and who
is going to create those norms? FC: The rules that govern the technology layers of the
internet are now well put in place, and I was very busy for a few years setting those
rules around the part of the internet that makes the internet one network. The domain-name
system, the IP numbers, all of that is in place. However, as we get now into the upper
layers of the internet, the issues that affect me and you every day — privacy, security,
etc. — the system to create norms for those unfortunately is not in place. So we do have
an issue. We have a system of cooperation and governance that really needs to be created
right now so that companies, governments and the citizenry can agree how this new digital
world is going to advance. BF: So what gives a digital company any incentive? Let's say —
Facebook comes to mind — they would say they have their users' best interests at heart,
but I think a lot of people would disagree with that. FC: It's been very difficult to watch
how tech companies have reacted to the citizenry's response to their technologies.

And some of them, two or three years ago, basically dismissed it. The word that I heard in
many board rooms is, "We're just a technology platform. It's not my issue if my technology
platform causes families to go kill their girls in Pakistan. It's not my issue. It's their
problem. I just have a technology platform." Now, I think we are now entering a stage
where companies are starting to realize this is no longer sustainable, and they're
starting to see the pushback that's coming from people, users, citizens, but also
governments that are starting to say, "This cannot be."So I think there is a maturity that
is starting to set, especially in that Silicon Valley area, where people are beginning to
say, "We have a role." So when I speak to these leaders, I say, "Look, you could be the
CEO, a very successful CEO of a company, but you could also be a steward." And that's the
key word. "You could be a steward of the power you have to shape the lives and the
economies of billions of people.

Which one do you want to be?" And the answer is, it's not one or the other. This is what
we are missing right now. So when an adult like Brad Smith, the president of Microsoft,
said a few months ago, "We need a new set of Geneva Conventions to manage the security of
the digital space," many of the senior leaders in Silicon Valley actually spoke against
his words. "What do you mean, Geneva Convention? We don't need any Geneva Conventions. We
self-regulate." But that mood is changing, and I'm starting to see many leaders say, "Help
us out." But here lies the conundrum. Who is going to help those leaders do the right
thing? BF: So who is going to help them? Because I'd love to interview you for an hour, but
give me your biggest fear and your best hope for how this is going to work out. FC: My
biggest hope is that we will become each stewards of this new digital world. That's my
biggest hope, because I do think, often, we want to put the blame on others. "Oh, it's
these CEOs.

They're behaving this way." "These governments are not doing enough." But how about us?
How is each of us actually taking the responsibility to be a steward of the digital space
we live in? And one of the things I've been pushing on university presidents is we need
every engineering and science and computer science student who is about to write the next
line of code or design the next IoT device to actually have in them a sense of
responsibility and stewardship towards what they're building. So I suggested we create a
new oath, like the Hippocratic Oath, so that every student entering an engineering program
takes a technocratic oath or a wisdom oath or some oath of commitment to the rest of us.
That's my best hope, that we all rise. Because governments and businesses will fight over
this power game, but where are we? And unless we play into that power table, I think we'll
end up in a bad place. My biggest fear?

My biggest fear, to be very tactical today, what is keeping me up at night is the current
war between the West, the liberal world, and China, in the area of artificial
intelligence. There is a real war going on, and for those of us who have lived through the
nuclear nonproliferation age and saw how people agreed to take some very dangerous things
off the table, well, the Carnegie Endowment just finished a study. They talked to every
country that made nuclear weapons and asked them, "Which digital 'weapon' would you take
off the table against somebody else's schools or hospitals?" And the answer — from every
nuclear power — to this question was, nothing. That's what I'm worried about ... The
weaponization of the digital space, and the race to get there. BF: Well, it sounds like
you've got a lot of work to do, and so do the rest of us. Fadi, thank you so much. I
really appreciate it. FC: Thank you.

<!--
ad_duration=3.33
comment_count=38
event="TED Salon Verizon"
external_start_time=0
has_talk_citation=0
intro_duration=11.82
is_subtitle_required="False"
is_talk_featured="True"
language="en"
language_swap="False"
native_language="en"
number_of_related_talks=6
number_of_speakers=2
number_of_subtitled_videos=22
number_of_tags=7
number_of_talk_download_languages=22
number_of_talk_more_resources=1
number_of_talk_recommendations=0
number_of_talks_take_actions=0
post_ad_duration=0.83
published_timestamp="2018-10-30 14:39:23"
recording_date="2018-09-20"
speaker_description="Technologist, entrepreneur"
speaker_is_published=1
speaker_name="Fadi Chehadé and Bryn Freedman"
talk_name="What everyday citizens can do to claim power on the internet"
talks_tags=["internet","future","economics","humanity","society","community","technology"]
talks_take_action=[]
url_audio="https://download.ted.com/talks/FadiChehade_2018S.mp3?apikey=acme-roadrunner"
url_photo_speaker="https://pe.tedcdn.com/images/ted/c6f031d8b4825fa8d45420cb5e9f0cef113d314a_254x191.jpg"
url_photo_talk="https://s3.amazonaws.com/talkstar-photos/uploads/d873530d-867e-4be8-a2f2-afb571932c84/FadiChehade_2018S-embed.jpg"
url_webpage="https://www.ted.com/talks/fadi_chehade_and_bryn_freedman_what_everyday_citizens_can_do_to_claim_power_on_the_internet"
video_type_name="TED Salon Talk (partner)"
-->