---
title: Why colonialist stereotypes persist -- and how to stop romanticizing history
speaker: Farish Ahmad-Noor
description: >-
 Colonialism remains an inescapable blight on the present, lingering in the toxic,
 internalized mythologies and stereotypes that have outlived the regimes that
 created them, says historian Farish Ahmad-Noor. Examining why these prejudices
 and narratives persist (and sometimes thrive), he suggests a multidisciplinary
 approach to reject cultural obsessions with romanticized history and prevent this
 nostalgia from perpetuating past oppressions.
date: 2019-09-28
tags: ["global-issues","history","philosophy","tedx","society","storytelling"]
slug: farish_ahmad_noor_why_colonialist_stereotypes_persist_and_how_to_stop_romanticizing_history
---

I promise you that I will not sing. I will spare you that, at least. But I am a historian
with a background in philosophy, and my main area of research is basically the history of
Southeast Asia, with a focus on 19th-century colonial Southeast Asia. And over the last
few years, what I've been doing is really tracing the history of certain ideas that shape
our viewpoint, the way we in Asia, in Southeast Asia, look at ourselves and understand
ourselves. Now, there's one thing that I cannot explain as a historian, and this has been
puzzling me for a long time, and this is how and why certain ideas, certain viewpoints do
not seem to ever go away. And I don't know why. And in particular, I'm interested to
understand why some people — not all, by no means — but some people in postcolonial Asia
still hold on to a somewhat romanticized view of the colonial past, see it through kind of
rose-tinted lenses as perhaps a time that was benevolent or nice or pleasant, even though
historians know the realities of the violence and the oppression and the darker side of
that entire colonial experience.

So let's imagine that I build a time machine for myself.(Makes beeping noises)I build a
time machine, I send myself back to the 1860s, a hundred years before I was born. Oh dear,
I've just dated myself. OK, I go back a hundred years before I was born. Now, if I were to
find myself in the context of colonial Southeast Asia in the 19th century, I would not be
a professor. Historians know this. And yet, despite that, there's still some quarters that
somehow want to hold on to this idea that that past was not as murky, that there was a
romanticized side to it. Now, here is where I, as a historian, I encounter the limits of
history, because I can trace ideas. I can find out the origins of certain clichés, certain
stereotypes. I can tell you who came up with it, where and when and in which book. But
there's one thing I cannot do: I cannot get into the internal, subjective mental universe
of someone and change their mind.

And I think this is where and why, over the last few years, I'm increasingly drawn to
things like psychology and cognitive behavioral therapy; because in these fields, scholars
look at the persistence of ideas. Why do some people have certain prejudices? Why are
there certain biases, certain phobias? We live, unfortunately, sadly, in a world where,
still, misogyny persists, racism persists, all kinds of phobias. Islamophobia, for
instance, is now a term. And why do these ideas persist? Many scholars agree that it's
partly because, when looking at the world, we fall back, we fall back, we fall back on a
finite pool, a small pool of basic ideas that don't get challenged. Look at how we,
particularly us in Southeast Asia, represent ourselves to ourselves and to the world. Look
at how often, when we talk about ourselves, my viewpoint, my identity, our identity,
invariably, we fall back, we fall back, we fall back, we fall back on the same set of
ideas, all of which have histories of their own. Very simple example: we live in Southeast
Asia, which is very popular with tourists from all over the world.

And I don't think that's a bad thing, by the way. I think it's good that tourists come to
Southeast Asia, because it's part and parcel of broadening your worldview and meeting
cultures, etc, etc. But look at how we represent ourselves through the tourist campaigns,
the tourist ads that we produce. There will be the obligatory coconut tree, banana tree,
orangutan.

And the orangutan doesn't even get paid.

Look at how we represent ourselves. Look at how we represent nature. Look at how we
represent the countryside. Look at how we represent agricultural life. Watch our sitcoms.
Watch our dramas. Watch our movies. It's very common, particularly in Southeast Asia, when
you watch these sitcoms, if there's someone from the countryside, invariably, they're
ugly, they're funny, they're silly, they're without knowledge. It's as if the countryside
has nothing to offer. Our view of nature, despite all our talk, despite all our talk about
Asian philosophy, Asian values, despite all our talk about how we have an organic
relationship to nature, how do we actually treat nature in Southeast Asia today? We regard
nature as something to be defeated and exploited. And that's the reality. So the way in
which we live in our part of the world, postcolonial Southeast Asia, in so many ways, for
me, bears residual traces to ideas, tropes, clichés, stereotypes that have a
history.

This idea of the countryside as a place to be exploited, the idea of countryfolk as being
without knowledge — these are ideas that historians like me can go back, we can trace how
these stereotypes emerged. And they emerged at a time when Southeast Asia was being
governed according to the logic of colonial capitalism. And in so many ways, we've taken
these ideas with us. They're part of us now. But we are not critical in interrogating
ourselves and asking ourselves, how did I have this view of the world? How did I come to
have this view of nature? How did I come to have this view of the countryside? How do I
have this idea of Asia as exotic? And we, Southeast Asians in particular, love to
self-exoticize ourselves. We've turned Southeast Asian identity into a kind of cosplay
where you can literally go to the supermarket, go to the mall and buy your do-it-yourself
exotic Southeast Asian costume kit.

And we parade this identity, not asking ourselves how and when did this particular image
of ourselves emerge. They all have a history, too. And that's why, increasingly, as a
historian, I find that as I encounter the limits of history, I see that I can't work alone
anymore. I can't work alone anymore, because there's absolutely no point in me doing my
archival work, there's no point in me seeking the roots of these ideas, tracing the
genesis of ideas and then putting it in some journal to be read by maybe three other
historians. There's absolutely no point. The reason why I think this is important is
because our region, Southeast Asia, will, I believe, in the years to come, go through
enormous changes, unprecedented changes in our history, partly because of globalization,
world politics, geopolitical contestations, the impact of technology, the Fourth
Industrial Revolution ... Our world as we know it is going to change. But for us to adapt
to this change, for us to be ready for that change, we need to think out of the box, and
we can't fall back, we can't fall back, we can't fall back on the same set of clichéd,
tired, staid old stereotypes.

We need to think out, and that's why historians, we can't work alone now. I, I need to
engage with people in psychology, people in behavioral therapy. I need to engage with
sociologists, anthropologists, political economists. I need above all to engage with
people in the arts and the media, because it's there, in that forum, outside the confines
of the university, that these debates really need to take place. And they need to take
place now, because we need to understand that the way things are today are not determined
by some fixed, iron historical railway track, but rather there are many other histories,
many other ideas that were forgotten, marginalized, erased along the line. Historians like
me, our job is to uncover all this, discover all this, but we need to engage this, we need
to engage with society as a whole. So to go back to that time machine example I gave
earlier. Let's say this is a 19th-century colonial subject then, and a person's wondering,
"Will empire ever come to an end?

Will there be an end to all this? Will we one day be free?" So the person invents a time
machine —(Makes beeping noises)goes into the future and arrives here in postcolonial
Southeast Asia today. And the person looks around, and the person will see, well yes,
indeed, the imperial flags are gone, the imperial gunboats are gone, the colonial armies
are gone. There are new flags, new nation-states. There is independence after all. But has
there been? The person then watches the tourist ads and sees again the banana tree, the
coconut tree and the orangutan. The person watches on TV and watches how images of an
exotic Southeast Asia are being reproduced again and again by Southeast Asians. And the
person might then come to the conclusion that, well, notwithstanding the fact that
colonialism is over, we are still in so, so many ways living in the long shadow of the
19th century. And this, I think, has become my personal mission.

The reason why I think history is so important and the reason why I think it's so
important for history to go beyond history, because need to reignite this debate about who
and what we are, all of us. We talk about, "No, I have my viewpoint, you have your
viewpoint." Well, that's partly true. Our viewpoints are never entirely our own
individually. We're all social beings. We're historical beings. You, me, all of us, we
carry history in us. It's in the language we use. It's in the fiction we write. It's in
the movies we choose to watch. It's in the images that we conjure when we think of who and
what we are. We are historical beings. We carry history with us, and history carries us
along. But while we are determined by history, it is my personal belief that we need not
be trapped by history, and we need not be the victims of history. Thank
you.

<!--
ad_duration=3.33
comment_count=3
event="TEDxNTU"
has_talk_citation=1
intro_duration=11.82
is_subtitle_required="False"
is_talk_featured="True"
language="en"
language_swap="False"
native_language="en"
number_of_related_talks=6
number_of_speakers=1
number_of_subtitled_videos=1
number_of_tags=6
number_of_talk_download_languages=1
number_of_talk_more_resources=0
number_of_talk_recommendations=0
number_of_talks_take_actions=0
post_ad_duration=0.83
published_timestamp="2020-06-23 15:20:15"
recording_date="2019-09-28"
speaker_description="Historian"
speaker_is_published=1
speaker_name="Farish Ahmad-Noor"
talk_more_resources=[]
talk_name="Why colonialist stereotypes persist -- and how to stop romanticizing history"
talks_tags=["global-issues","history","philosophy","tedx","society","storytelling"]
talks_take_action=[]
url_audio="https://download.ted.com/talks/FarishAhmadNoor_2019X.mp3?apikey=acme-roadrunner"
url_photo_speaker="https://pe.tedcdn.com/images/ted/bdd43ad080c5a3cad35bd0715705f780da107107_254x191.jpg"
url_photo_talk="https://s3.amazonaws.com/talkstar-photos/uploads/c3e87537-1f3a-492c-9984-f424e95e7da7/FarishAhmad-Noor_2019X-embed.jpg"
url_webpage="https://www.ted.com/talks/farish_ahmad_noor_why_colonialist_stereotypes_persist_and_how_to_stop_romanticizing_history"
video_type_name="TEDx Talk"
-->