---
title: Comics belong in the classroom
speaker: Gene Luen Yang
description: >-
 Comic books and graphic novels belong in every teacher's toolkit, says cartoonist
 and educator Gene Luen Yang. Set against the backdrop of his own witty, colorful
 drawings, Yang explores the history of comics in American education -- and
 reveals some unexpected insights about their potential for helping kids
 learn.
date: 2016-11-05
tags: ["tedx","art","books","creativity","education","social-change","society","teaching"]
slug: gene_luen_yang_comics_belong_in_the_classroom
---

When I was in the fifth grade, I bought an issue of "DC Comics Presents #57" off of a
spinner rack at my local bookstore, and that comic book changed my life. The combination
of words and pictures did something inside my head that had never been done before, and I
immediately fell in love with the medium of comics. I became a voracious comic book
reader, but I never brought them to school. Instinctively, I knew that comic books didn't
belong in the classroom. My parents definitely were not fans, and I was certain that my
teachers wouldn't be either. After all, they never used them to teach, comic books and
graphic novels were never allowed during silent sustained reading, and they were never
sold at our annual book fair. Even so, I kept reading comics, and I even started making
them. Eventually I became a published cartoonist, writing and drawing comic books for a
living. I also became a high school teacher. This is where I taught: Bishop O'Dowd High
School in Oakland, California.

I taught a little bit of math and a little bit of art, but mostly computer science, and I
was there for 17 years. When I was a brand new teacher, I tried bringing comic books into
my classroom. I remember telling my students on the first day of every class that I was
also a cartoonist. It wasn't so much that I was planning to teach them with comics, it was
more that I was hoping comics would make them think that I was cool.

I was wrong. This was the '90s, so comic books didn't have the cultural cachet that they
do today. My students didn't think I was cool. They thought I was kind of a dork. And even
worse, when stuff got hard in my class, they would use comic books as a way of distracting
me. They would raise their hands and ask me questions like, "Mr. Yang, who do you think
would win in a fight, Superman or the Hulk?"

I very quickly realized I had to keep my teaching and my cartooning separate. It seemed
like my instincts in fifth grade were correct. Comic books didn't belong in the
classroom. But again, I was wrong. A few years into my teaching career, I learned firsthand
the educational potential of comics. One semester, I was asked to sub for this Algebra 2
class. I was asked to long-term sub it, and I said yes, but there was a problem. At the
time, I was also the school's educational technologist, which meant every couple of weeks
I had to miss one or two periods of this Algebra 2 class because I was in another
classroom helping another teacher with a computer-related activity. For these Algebra 2
students, that was terrible. I mean, having a long-term sub is bad enough, but having a
sub for your sub? That's the worst. In an effort to provide some sort of consistency for
my students, I began videotaping myself giving lectures. I'd then give these videos to my
sub to play for my students.

I tried to make these videos as engaging as possible. I even included these little special
effects. For instance, after I finished a problem on the board, I'd clap my hands, and the
board would magically erase.

I thought it was pretty awesome. I was pretty certain that my students would love it, but
I was wrong.

These video lectures were a disaster. I had students coming up to me and saying things
like, "Mr. Yang, we thought you were boring in person, but on video, you are just
unbearable."

So as a desperate second attempt, I began drawing these lectures as comics. I'd do these
very quickly with very little planning. I'd just take a sharpie, draw one panel after the
other, figuring out what I wanted to say as I went. These comics lectures would come out
to anywhere between four and six pages long, I'd xerox these, give them to my sub to hand
to my students. And much to my surprise, these comics lectures were a hit. My students
would ask me to make these for them even when I could be there in person. It was like they
liked cartoon me more than actual me.

This surprised me, because my students are part of a generation that was raised on
screens, so I thought for sure they would like learning from a screen better than learning
from a page. But when I talked to my students about why they liked these comics lectures
so much, I began to understand the educational potential of comics. First, unlike their
math textbooks, these comics lectures taught visually. Our students grow up in a visual
culture, so they're used to taking in information that way. But unlike other visual
narratives, like film or television or animation or video, comics are what I call
permanent. In a comic, past, present and future all sit side by side on the same page.
This means that the rate of information flow is firmly in the hands of the reader. When my
students didn't understand something in my comics lecture, they could just reread that
passage as quickly or as slowly as they needed. It was like I was giving them a remote
control over the information.

The same was not true of my video lectures, and it wasn't even true of my in-person
lectures. When I speak, I deliver the information as quickly or slowly as I want. So for
certain students and certain kinds of information, these two aspects of the comics medium,
its visual nature and its permanence, make it an incredibly powerful educational tool. When
I was teaching this Algebra 2 class, I was also working on my master's in education at Cal
State East Bay. And I was so intrigued by this experience that I had with these comics
lectures that I decided to focus my final master's project on comics. I wanted to figure
out why American educators have historically been so reluctant to use comic books in their
classrooms. Here's what I discovered. Comic books first became a mass medium in the 1940s,
with millions of copies selling every month, and educators back then took notice. A lot of
innovative teachers began bringing comics into their classrooms to experiment.

In 1944, the "Journal of Educational Sociology" even devoted an entire issue to this
topic. Things seemed to be progressing. Teachers were starting to figure things out. But
then along comes this guy. This is child psychologist Dr. Fredric Wertham, and in 1954, he
wrote a book called "Seduction of the Innocent," where he argues that comic books cause
juvenile delinquency.

He was wrong. Now, Dr. Wertham was actually a pretty decent guy. He spent most of his
career working with juvenile delinquents, and in his work he noticed that most of his
clients read comic books. What Dr. Wertham failed to realize was in the 1940s and '50s,
almost every kid in America read comic books. Dr. Wertham does a pretty dubious job of
proving his case, but his book does inspire the Senate of the United States to hold a
series of hearings to see if in fact comic books caused juvenile delinquency. These
hearings lasted for almost two months. They ended inconclusively, but not before doing
tremendous damage to the reputation of comic books in the eyes of the American
public. After this, respectable American educators all backed away, and they stayed away
for decades. It wasn't until the 1970s that a few brave souls started making their way
back in. And it really wasn't until pretty recently, maybe the last decade or so, that
comics have seen more widespread acceptance among American educators. Comic books and
graphic novels are now finally making their way back into American classrooms and this is
even happening at Bishop O'Dowd, where I used to teach.

Mr. Smith, one of my former colleagues, uses Scott McCloud's "Understanding Comics" in his
literature and film class, because that book gives his students the language with which to
discuss the relationship between words and images. Mr. Burns assigns a comics essay to his
students every year. By asking his students to process a prose novel using images, Mr.
Burns asks them to think deeply not just about the story but also about how that story is
told. And Ms. Murrock uses my own "American Born Chinese" with her English 1 students. For
her, graphic novels are a great way of fulfilling a Common Core Standard. The Standard
states that students ought to be able to analyze how visual elements contribute to the
meaning, tone and beauty of a text. Over in the library, Ms. Counts has built a pretty
impressive graphic novel collection for Bishop O'Dowd. Now, Ms. Counts and all of her
librarian colleagues have really been at the forefront of comics advocacy, really since
the early '80s, when a school library journal article stated that the mere presence of
graphic novels in the library increased usage by about 80 percent and increased the
circulation of noncomics material by about 30 percent. Inspired by this renewed interest
from American educators, American cartoonists are now producing more explicitly
educational content for the K-12 market than ever before.

A lot of this is directed at language arts, but more and more comics and graphic novels
are starting to tackle math and science topics. STEM comics graphics novels really are
like this uncharted territory, ready to be explored. America is finally waking up to the
fact that comic books do not cause juvenile delinquency.

That they really do belong in every educator's toolkit. There's no good reason to keep
comic books and graphic novels out of K-12 education. They teach visually, they give our
students that remote control. The educational potential is there just waiting to be tapped
by creative people like you. Thank you.

<!--
ad_duration=3.33
comment_count=19
event="TEDxManhattanBeach"
external_start_time=0
has_talk_citation=0
intro_duration=11.82
is_subtitle_required="False"
is_talk_featured="True"
language="en"
language_swap="False"
native_language="en"
number_of_related_talks=6
number_of_speakers=1
number_of_subtitled_videos=27
number_of_tags=8
number_of_talk_download_languages=28
number_of_talk_more_resources=0
number_of_talk_recommendations=1
number_of_talks_take_actions=0
post_ad_duration=0.83
published_timestamp="2018-05-25 14:48:52"
recording_date="2016-11-05"
speaker_description="Cartoonist, educator"
speaker_is_published=1
speaker_name="Gene Luen Yang"
talk_more_resources=[]
talk_name="Comics belong in the classroom"
talk_recommendations_blurb="More resources curated by Gene Luen Yang"
talks_tags=["tedx","art","books","creativity","education","social-change","society","teaching"]
talks_take_action=[]
url_audio="https://download.ted.com/talks/GeneYang_2016X.mp3?apikey=acme-roadrunner"
url_photo_speaker="https://pe.tedcdn.com/images/ted/bf2b1b64bdd9c9b7e6a6e61710f57da686e8487d_254x191.jpg"
url_photo_talk="https://s3.amazonaws.com/talkstar-photos/uploads/b89e4d97-9e91-48be-bc5c-44c994455333/GeneYang_2016X-embed.jpg"
url_webpage="https://www.ted.com/talks/gene_luen_yang_comics_belong_in_the_classroom"
video_type_name="TEDx Talk"
-->