---
title: The disarming case to act right now on climate change
speaker: Greta Thunberg
description: >-
 In this passionate call to action, 16-year-old climate activist Greta Thunberg
 explains why, in August 2018, she walked out of school and organized a strike to
 raise awareness of global warming, protesting outside the Swedish parliament and
 grabbing the world's attention. "The climate crisis has already been solved. We
 already have all the facts and solutions," Thunberg says. "All we have to do is
 to wake up and change."
date: 2018-11-24
tags: ["climate-change","environment","sustainability","politics","education","society","social-change","pollution","anthropocene"]
slug: greta_thunberg_the_disarming_case_to_act_right_now_on_climate_change
---

When I was about eight years old, I first heard about something called climate change or
global warming. Apparently, that was something humans had created by our way of living. I
was told to turn off the lights to save energy and to recycle paper to save resources. I
remember thinking that it was very strange that humans, who are an animal species among
others, could be capable of changing the Earth's climate. Because if we were, and if it
was really happening, we wouldn't be talking about anything else. As soon as you'd turn on
the TV, everything would be about that. Headlines, radio, newspapers, you would never read
or hear about anything else, as if there was a world war going on. But no one ever talked
about it. If burning fossil fuels was so bad that it threatened our very existence, how
could we just continue like before? Why were there no restrictions? Why wasn't it made
illegal? To me, that did not add up. It was too unreal. So when I was 11, I became
ill.

I fell into depression, I stopped talking, and I stopped eating. In two months, I lost
about 10 kilos of weight. Later on, I was diagnosed with Asperger syndrome, OCD and
selective mutism. That basically means I only speak when I think it's necessary - now is
one of those moments.

For those of us who are on the spectrum, almost everything is black or white. We aren't
very good at lying, and we usually don't enjoy participating in this social game that the
rest of you seem so fond of.

I think in many ways that we autistic are the normal ones, and the rest of the people are
pretty strange,

especially when it comes to the sustainability crisis, where everyone keeps saying climate
change is an existential threat and the most important issue of all, and yet they just
carry on like before. I don't understand that, because if the emissions have to stop, then
we must stop the emissions. To me that is black or white. There are no gray areas when it
comes to survival. Either we go on as a civilization or we don't. We have to change. Rich
countries like Sweden need to start reducing emissions by at least 15 percent every year.
And that is so that we can stay below a two-degree warming target. Yet, as the IPCC have
recently demonstrated, aiming instead for 1.5 degrees Celsius would significantly reduce
the climate impacts. But we can only imagine what that means for reducing emissions. You
would think the media and every one of our leaders would be talking about nothing else,
but they never even mention it.

Nor does anyone ever mention the greenhouse gases already locked in the system. Nor that
air pollution is hiding a warming so that when we stop burning fossil fuels, we already
have an extra level of warming perhaps as high as 0.5 to 1.1 degrees Celsius. Furthermore
does hardly anyone speak about the fact that we are in the midst of the sixth mass
extinction, with up to 200 species going extinct every single day, that the extinction
rate today is between 1,000 and 10,000 times higher than what is seen as normal. Nor does
hardly anyone ever speak about the aspect of equity or climate justice, clearly stated
everywhere in the Paris Agreement, which is absolutely necessary to make it work on a
global scale. That means that rich countries need to get down to zero emissions within 6
to 12 years, with today's emission speed. And that is so that people in poorer countries
can have a chance to heighten their standard of living by building some of the
infrastructure that we have already built, such as roads, schools, hospitals, clean
drinking water, electricity, and so on.

Because how can we expect countries like India or Nigeria to care about the climate crisis
if we who already have everything don't care even a second about it or our actual
commitments to the Paris Agreement? So, why are we not reducing our emissions? Why are they
in fact still increasing? Are we knowingly causing a mass extinction? Are we evil? No, of
course not. People keep doing what they do because the vast majority doesn't have a clue
about the actual consequences of our everyday life, and they don't know that rapid change
is required. We all think we know, and we all think everybody knows, but we don't. Because
how could we? If there really was a crisis, and if this crisis was caused by our
emissions, you would at least see some signs. Not just flooded cities, tens of thousands
of dead people, and whole nations leveled to piles of torn down buildings. You would see
some restrictions. But no. And no one talks about it. There are no emergency meetings, no
headlines, no breaking news.

No one is acting as if we were in a crisis. Even most climate scientists or green
politicians keep on flying around the world, eating meat and dairy. If I live to be 100, I
will be alive in the year 2103. When you think about the future today, you don't think
beyond the year 2050. By then, I will, in the best case, not even have lived half of my
life. What happens next? The year 2078, I will celebrate my 75th birthday. If I have
children or grandchildren, maybe they will spend that day with me. Maybe they will ask me
about you, the people who were around, back in 2018. Maybe they will ask why you didn't do
anything while there still was time to act. What we do or don't do right now will affect
my entire life and the lives of my children and grandchildren. What we do or don't do
right now, me and my generation can't undo in the future. So when school started in August
of this year, I decided that this was enough. I set myself down on the ground outside the
Swedish parliament.

I school striked for the climate. Some people say that I should be in school instead. Some
people say that I should study to become a climate scientist so that I can "solve the
climate crisis." But the climate crisis has already been solved. We already have all the
facts and solutions. All we have to do is to wake up and change. And why should I be
studying for a future that soon will be no more when no one is doing anything whatsoever
to save that future? And what is the point of learning facts in the school system when the
most important facts given by the finest science of that same school system clearly means
nothing to our politicians and our society. Some people say that Sweden is just a small
country, and that it doesn't matter what we do, but I think that if a few children can get
headlines all over the world just by not coming to school for a few weeks, imagine what we
could all do together if you wanted to.

Now we're almost at the end of my talk, and this is where people usually start talking
about hope, solar panels, wind power, circular economy, and so on, but I'm not going to do
that. We've had 30 years of pep-talking and selling positive ideas. And I'm sorry, but it
doesn't work. Because if it would have, the emissions would have gone down by now. They
haven't. And yes, we do need hope, of course we do. But the one thing we need more than
hope is action. Once we start to act, hope is everywhere. So instead of looking for hope,
look for action. Then, and only then, hope will come. Today, we use 100 million barrels of
oil every single day. There are no politics to change that. There are no rules to keep
that oil in the ground. So we can't save the world by playing by the rules, because the
rules have to be changed. Everything needs to change â€” and it has to start today. Thank
you.

<!--
ad_duration=3.33
event="TEDxStockholm"
external_start_time=0
has_talk_citation=1
intro_duration=11.82
is_subtitle_required="False"
is_talk_featured="True"
language="en"
language_swap="False"
native_language="en"
number_of_related_talks=6
number_of_speakers=1
number_of_subtitled_videos=36
number_of_tags=9
number_of_talk_download_languages=37
number_of_talk_more_resources=0
number_of_talk_recommendations=1
number_of_talks_take_actions=2
post_ad_duration=0.83
published_timestamp="2019-01-28 21:56:08"
recording_date="2018-11-24"
speaker_description="Climate activist"
speaker_is_published=1
speaker_name="Greta Thunberg"
talk_more_resources=[]
talk_name="The disarming case to act right now on climate change"
talk_recommendations_blurb="More resources curated by Greta Thunberg"
talks_tags=["climate-change","environment","sustainability","politics","education","society","social-change","pollution","anthropocene"]
url_audio="https://download.ted.com/talks/GretaThunberg_2018X.mp3?apikey=acme-roadrunner"
url_photo_speaker="https://pe.tedcdn.com/images/ted/d7a180a6bd84ea5332f1a0716de4e13c27a24290_254x191.jpg"
url_photo_talk="https://s3.amazonaws.com/talkstar-photos/uploads/e8fa1892-07d7-4e82-971e-34ed2efa5d35/GretaThunberg_2018X-embed.jpg"
url_webpage="https://www.ted.com/talks/greta_thunberg_the_disarming_case_to_act_right_now_on_climate_change"
video_type_name="TEDx Talk"
-->