---
title: Political common ground in a polarized United States
speaker: Gretchen Carlson, David Brooks
description: >-
 How can we bridge the gap between left and right to have a wiser, more connected
 political conversation? Journalist Gretchen Carlson and op-ed columnist David
 Brooks share insights on the tensions at the heart of American politics today --
 and where we can find common ground. Followed by a rousing performance of
 "America the Beautiful" by Vy Higginsen's Gospel Choir of Harlem.
date: 2017-03-01
tags: ["collaboration","communication","democracy","government","future","history","humanity","immigration","identity","inequality","infrastructure","journalism","policy","news","security","politics","social-media","social-change","women","united-states","writing"]
slug: gretchen_carlson_david_brooks_political_common_ground_in_a_polarized_united_states
---

Chris Anderson: Welcome to this next edition of TED Dialogues. We're trying to do some
bridging here today. You know, the American dream has inspired millions of people around
the world for many years. Today, I think, you can say that America is divided, perhaps
more than ever, and the divisions seem to be getting worse. It's actually really hard for
people on different sides to even have a conversation. People almost feel... disgusted
with each other. Some families can't even speak to each other right now. Our purpose in
this dialogue today is to try to do something about that, to try to have a different kind
of conversation, to do some listening, some thinking, some understanding. And I have two
people with us to help us do that. They're not going to come at this hammer and tong
against each other. This is not like cable news. This is two people who have both spent a
lot of their working life in the political center or right of the center.

They've immersed themselves in conservative worldviews, if you like. They know that space
very well. And we're going to explore together how to think about what is happening right
now, and whether we can find new ways to bridge and just to have wiser, more connected
conversations. With me, first of all, Gretchen Carlson, who has spent a decade working at
Fox News, hosting "Fox and Friends" and then "The Real Story," before taking a courageous
stance in filing sexual harassment claims against Roger Ailes, which eventually led to his
departure from Fox News. David Brooks, who has earned the wrath of many of [The New York
Times's] left-leaning readers because of his conservative views, and more recently,
perhaps, some of the right-leaning readers because of his criticism of some aspects of
Trump. Yet, his columns are usually the top one, two or three most-read content of the day
because they're brilliant, because they bring psychology and social science to providing
understanding for what's going on.

So without further ado, a huge welcome to Gretchen and David. Come and join
me.

So, Gretchen. Sixty-three million Americans voted for Donald Trump. Why did they do
this? Gretchen Carlson: There are a lot of reasons, in my mind, why it happened. I mean, I
think it was a movement of sorts, but it started long ago. It didn't just happen
overnight. "Anger" would be the first word that I would think of — anger with nothing
being done in Washington, anger about not being heard. I think there was a huge swath of
the population that feels like Washington never listens to them, you know, a good part of
the middle of America, not just the coasts, and he was somebody they felt was listening to
their concerns. So I think those two issues would be the main reason. I have to throw in
there also celebrity. I think that had a huge impact on Donald Trump becoming
president. CA: Was the anger justified? David Brooks: Yeah, I think so. In 2015 and early
2016, I wrote about 30 columns with the following theme: don't worry, Donald Trump will
never be the Republican nominee.

And having done that and gotten that so wrong, I decided to spend the ensuing year just
out in Trumpworld, and I found a lot of economic dislocation. I ran into a woman in West
Virginia who was going to a funeral for her mom. She said, "The nice thing about being
Catholic is we don't have to speak, and that's good, because we're not word people." That
phrase rung in my head: word people. A lot of us in the TED community are word people, but
if you're not, the economy has not been angled toward you, and so 11 million men, for
example, are out of the labor force because those jobs are done away. A lot of social
injury. You used to be able to say, "I'm not the richest person in the world, I'm not the
most famous, but my neighbors can count on me and I get some dignity out of that." And
because of celebritification or whatever, if you're not rich or famous, you feel
invisible. And a lot of moral injury, sense of feeling betrayed, and frankly, in this
country, we almost have one success story, which is you go to college, get a white-collar
job, and you're a success, and if you don't fit in that formula, you feel like you're not
respected.

And so that accumulation of things — and when I talked to Trump voters and still do, I
found most of them completely realistic about his failings, but they said, this is my
shot. GC: And yet I predicted that he would be the nominee, because I've known him for 27
years. He's a master marketer, and one of the things he did extremely well that President
Obama also did extremely well, was simplifying the message, simplifying down to phrases
and to a populist message. Even if he can't achieve it, it sounded good. And many people
latched on to that simplicity again. It's something they could grasp onto: "I get that. I
want that. That sounds fantastic." And I remember when he used to come on my show
originally, before "The Apprentice" was even "The Apprentice," and he'd say it was the
number one show on TV. I'd say back to him, "No, it's not." And he would say, "Yes it is,
Gretchen." And I would say, "No it's not." But people at home would see that, and they'd
be like, "Wow, I should be watching the number one show on TV." And — lo and behold — it
became the number one show on TV.

So he had this, I've seen this ability in him to be the master marketer. CA: It's puzzling
to a lot of people on the left that so many women voted for him, despite some of his
comments. GC: I wrote a column about this for Time Motto, saying that I really believe that
lot of people put on blinders, and maybe for the first time, some people decided that
policies they believed in and being heard and not being invisible anymore was more
important to them than the way in which he had acted or acts as a human. And so human
dignity — whether it would be the dust-up about the disabled reporter, or what happened in
that audiotape with Billy Bush and the way in which he spoke about women — they put that
aside and pretended as if they hadn't seen that or heard that, because to them, policies
were more important. CA: Right, so just because someone voted for Trump, it's not blind
adherence to everything that he's said or stood for. GC: No.

I heard a lot of people that would say to me, "Wow, I just wish he would shut up before
the election. If he would just stay quiet, he'd get elected."CA: And so, maybe for people
on the left there's a trap there, to sort of despise or just be baffled by the support,
assuming that it's for some of the unattractive features. Actually, maybe they're
supporting him despite those, because they see something exciting. They see a man of
action. They see the choking hold of government being thrown off in some way and they're
excited by that. GC: But don't forget we saw that on the left as well — Bernie Sanders. So
this is one of the commonalities that I think we can talk about today, "The Year of the
Outsider," David — right? And even though Bernie Sanders has been in Congress for a long
time, he was deemed an outsider this time. And so there was anger on the left as well, and
so many people were in favor of Bernie Sanders. So I see it as a commonality.

People who like Trump, people who like Bernie Sanders, they were liking different
policies, but the underpinning was anger. CA: David, there's often this narrative, then,
that the sole explanation for Trump's victory and his rise is his tapping into anger in a
very visceral way. But you've written a bit about that it's actually more than that, that
there's a worldview that's being worked on here. Could you talk about that? DB: I would say
he understood what, frankly, I didn't, which is what debate we were having. And so I'd
grown up starting with Reagan, and it was the big government versus small government
debate. It was Barry Goldwater versus George McGovern, and that was the debate we had been
having for a generation. It was: Democrats wanted to use government to enhance equality,
Republicans wanted to limit government to enhance freedom. That was the debate. He
understood what I think the two major parties did not, which was that's not the debate
anymore.

The debate is now open versus closed. On one side are those who have the tailwinds of
globalization and the meritocracy blowing at their back, and they tend to favor open
trade, open borders, open social mores, because there are so many opportunities. On the
other side are those who feel the headwinds of globalization and the meritocracy just
blasting in their faces, and they favor closed trade, closed borders, closed social mores,
because they just want some security. And so he was right on that fundamental issue, and
people were willing to overlook a lot to get there. And so he felt that sense of
security. We're speaking the morning after Trump's joint session speech. There are three
traditional groups in the Republican Party. There are the foreign policies hawks who
believe in America as global policeman. Trump totally repudiated that view. Second, there
was the social conservatives who believed in religious liberty, pro-life, prayer in
schools. He totally ignored that.

There was not a single mention of a single social conservative issue. And then there were
the fiscal hawks, the people who wanted to cut down on the national debt, Tea Party, cut
the size of government. He's expanding the size of government! Here's a man who has
single-handedly revolutionized a major American party because he understood where the
debate was headed before other people. And then guys like Steve Bannon come in and give
him substance to his impulses. CA: And so take that a bit further, and maybe expand a bit
more on your insights into Steve Bannon's worldview. Because he's sometimes tarred in very
simple terms as this dangerous, racist, xenophobic, anger-sparking person. There's more to
the story; that is perhaps an unfair simplification. DB: I think that part is true, but
there's another part that's probably true, too. He's part of a global movement. It's like
being around Marxists in 1917.

There's him here, there's the UKIP party, there's the National Front in France, there's
Putin, there's a Turkish version, a Philippine version. So we have to recognize that this
is a global intellectual movement. And it believes that wisdom and virtue is not held in
individual conversation and civility the way a lot of us in the enlightenment side of the
world do. It's held in — the German word is the "volk" — in the people, in the common,
instinctive wisdom of the plain people. And the essential virtue of that people is always
being threatened by outsiders. And he's got a strategy for how to get there. He's got a
series of policies to bring the people up and repudiate the outsiders, whether those
outsiders are Islam, Mexicans, the media, the coastal elites... And there's a whole
worldview there; it's a very coherent worldview. I sort of have more respect for him. I
loathe what he stands for and I think he's wrong on the substance, but it's interesting to
see someone with a set of ideas find a vehicle, Donald Trump, and then try to take control
of the White House in order to advance his viewpoint. CA: So it's almost become, like, that
the core question of our time now is: Can you be patriotic but also have a global
mindset?

Are these two things implacably opposed to each other? I mean, a lot of conservatives and,
to the extent that it's a different category, a lot of Trump supporters, are infuriated by
the coastal elites and the globalists because they see them as, sort of, not cheering for
America, not embracing fully American values. I mean, have you seen that in your
conversations with people, in your understanding of their mindset? GC: I do think that
there's a huge difference between — I hate to put people in categories, but, Middle
America versus people who live on the coasts. It's an entirely different existence. And I
grew up in Minnesota, so I have an understanding of Middle America, and I've never
forgotten it. And maybe that's why I have an understanding of what happened here, because
those people often feel like nobody's listening to them, and that we're only concentrating
on California and New York. And so I think that was a huge reason why Trump was
elected.

I mean, these people felt like they were being heard. Whether or not patriotism falls into
that, I'm not sure about that. I do know one thing: a lot of things Trump talked about
last night are not conservative things. Had Hillary Clinton gotten up and given that
speech, not one Republican would have stood up to applaud. I mean, he's talking about
spending a trillion dollars on infrastructure. That is not a conservative viewpoint. He
talked about government-mandated maternity leave. A lot of women may love that; it's not a
conservative viewpoint. So it's fascinating that people who loved what his message was
during the campaign, I'm not sure — how do you think they'll react to that? DB: I should
say I grew up in Lower Manhattan, in the triangle between ABC Carpets, the Strand
Bookstore and The Odeon restaurant.

GC: Come to Minnesota sometime!

CA: You are a card-carrying member of the coastal elite, my man. But what did you make of
the speech last night? It seemed to be a move to a more moderate position, on the face of
it. DB: Yeah, I thought it was his best speech, and it took away the freakishness of him. I
do think he's a moral freak, and I think he'll be undone by that fact, the fact that he
just doesn't know anything about anything and is uncurious about it.

But if you take away these minor flaws, I think we got to see him at his best, and it was
revealing for me to see him at his best, because to me, it exposed a central contradiction
that he's got to confront, that a lot of what he's doing is offering security. So, "I'm
ordering closed borders, I'm going to secure the world for you, for my people." But then
if you actually look at a lot of his economic policies, like health care reform, which is
about private health care accounts, that's not security, that's risk. Educational
vouchers: that's risk. Deregulation: that's risk. There's really a contradiction between
the security of the mindset and a lot of the policies, which are very risk-oriented. And
what I would say, especially having spent this year, the people in rural Minnesota, in New
Mexico — they've got enough risk in their lives. And so they're going to say, "No thank
you." And I think his health care repeal will fail for that reason. CA: But despite the
criticisms you just made of him, it does at least seem that he's listening to a
surprisingly wide range of voices; it's not like everyone is coming from the same
place.

And maybe that leads to a certain amount of chaos and confusion, but —GC: I actually don't
think he's listening to a wide range of voices. I think he's listening to very few people.
That's just my impression of it. I believe that some of the things he said last night had
Ivanka all over them. So I believe he was listening to her before that speech. And he was
Teleprompter Trump last night, as opposed to Twitter Trump. And that's why, before we came
out here, I said, "We better check Twitter to see if anything's changed." And also I think
you have to keep in mind that because he's such a unique character, what was the bar that
we were expecting last night? Was it here or here or here? And so he comes out and gives a
looking political speech, and everyone goes, "Wow! He can do it." It just depends on which
direction he goes. DB: Yeah, and we're trying to build bridges here, and especially for an
audience that may have contempt for Trump, it's important to say, no, this is a real
thing.

But as I try my best to go an hour showing respect for him, my thyroid is surging, because
I think the oddities of his character really are condemnatory and are going to doom
him. CA: Your reputation is as a conservative. People would you describe you as right of
center, and yet here you are with this visceral reaction against him and some of what he
stands for. I mean, I'm — how do you have a conversation? The people who support him, on
evidence so far, are probably pretty excited. He's certainly shown real engagement in a
lot of what he promised to do, and there is a strong desire to change the system
radically. People hate what government has become and how it's left them out. GC: I totally
agree with that, but I think that when he was proposing a huge government program last
night that we used to call the bad s-word, "stimulus," I find it completely ironic. To
spend a trillion dollars on something — that is not a conservative viewpoint.

Then again, I don't really believe he's a Republican. DB: And I would say, as someone who
identifies as conservative: first of all, to be conservative is to believe in the
limitations of politics. Samuel Johnson said, "Of all the things that human hearts endure,
how few are those that kings can cause and cure." Politics is a limited realm; what
matters most is the moral nature of the society. And so I have to think character comes
first, and a man who doesn't pass the character threshold cannot be a good president.
Second, I'm the kind of conservative who — I harken back to Alexander Hamilton, who was a
Latino hip-hop star from the heights —

but his definition of America was very future-oriented. He was a poor boy from the islands
who had this rapid and amazing rise to success, and he wanted government to give poor boys
and girls like him a chance to succeed, using limited but energetic government to create
social mobility. For him and for Lincoln and for Teddy Roosevelt, the idea of America was
the idea of the future. We may have division and racism and slavery in our past, but we
have a common future. The definition of America that Steve Bannon stands for is
backwards-looking. It's nostalgic; it's for the past. And that is not traditionally the
American identity. That's traditionally, frankly, the Russian identity. That's how they
define virtue. And so I think it is a fundamental and foundational betrayal of what
conservatism used to stand for. CA: Well, I'd like actually like to hear from you, and if
we see some comments coming in from some of you, we'll — oh, well here's one right
now.

Jeffrey Alan Carnegie: I've tried to convince progressive friends that they need to
understand what motivates Trump supporters, yet many of them have given up trying to
understand in the face of what they perceive as lies, selfishness and hatred. How would
you reach out to such people, the Tea Party of the left, to try to bridge this divide? GC:
I actually think there are commonalities in anger, as I expressed earlier. So I think you
can come to the table, both being passionate about something. So at least you care. And I
would like to believe — the c-word has also become a horrible word — "compromise," right?
So you have the far left and the far right, and compromise — forget it. Those groups don't
want to even think about it. But you have a huge swath of voters, myself included, who are
registered independents, like 40 percent of us, right? So there is a huge faction of
America that wants to see change and wants to see people come together.

It's just that we have to figure out how to do that. CA: So let's talk about that for a
minute, because we're having these TED Dialogues, we're trying to bridge. There's a lot of
people out there, right now, perhaps especially on the left, who think this is a terrible
idea, that actually, the only moral response to the great tyranny that may be about to
emerge in America is to resist it at every stage, is to fight it tooth and nail, it's a
mistake to try and do this. Just fight! Is there a case for that? DB: It depends what
"fight" means. If it means literal fighting, then no. If it means marching, well maybe
marching to raise consciousness, that seems fine. But if you want change in this country,
we do it through parties and politics. We organize parties, and those parties are big,
diverse, messy coalitions, and we engage in politics, and politics is always morally
unsatisfying because it's always a bunch of compromises. But politics is essentially a
competition between partial truths.

The Trump people have a piece of the truth in America. I think Trump himself is the wrong
answer to the right question, but they have some truth, and it's truth found in the
epidemic of opiates around the country, it's truth found in the spread of loneliness, it's
the truth found in people whose lives are inverted. They peaked professionally at age 30,
and it's all been downhill since. And so, understanding that doesn't take fighting, it
takes conversation and then asking, "What are we going to replace Trump with?"GC: But you
saw fighting last night, even at the speech, because you saw the Democratic women who came
and wore white to honor the suffragette movement. I remember back during the campaign
where some Trump supporters wanted to actually get rid of the amendment that allowed us to
vote as women. It was like, what? So I don't know if that's the right way to fight. It was
interesting, because I was looking in the audience, trying to see Democratic women who
didn't wear white.

So there's a lot going on there, and there's a lot of ways to fight that are not
necessarily doing that. CA: I mean, one of the key questions, to me, is: The people who
voted for Trump but, if you like, are more in the center, like they're possibly amenable
to persuasion — are they more likely to be persuaded by seeing a passionate uprising of
people saying, "No, no, no, you can't!" or will that actually piss them off and push them
away? DB: How are any of us persuaded? Am I going to persuade you by saying, "Well, you're
kind of a bigot, you're supporting bigotry, you're supporting sexism. You're a primitive,
fascistic rise from some authoritarian past"? That's probably not going to be too
persuasive to you. And so the way any of us are persuaded is by: a) some basic show of
respect for the point of view, and saying, "I think this guy is not going to get you where
you need to go." And there are two phrases you've heard over and over again, wherever you
go in the country.

One, the phrase "flyover country." And that's been heard for years, but I would say this
year, I heard it almost on an hourly basis, a sense of feeling invisible. And then the
sense a sense of the phrase "political correctness." Just that rebellion: "They're not
even letting us say what we think." And I teach at Yale. The narrowing of debate is
real. CA: So you would say this is a trap that liberals have fallen into by celebrating
causes they really believe in, often expressed through the language of "political
correctness." They have done damage. They have pushed people away. DB: I would say a lot of
the argument, though, with "descent to fascism," "authoritarianism" — that just feels
over-the-top to people. And listen, I've written eight million anti-Trump columns, but it
is a problem, especially for the coastal media, that every time he does something slightly
wrong, we go to 11, and we're at 11 every day.

And it just strains credibility at some point. CA: Crying wolf a little too loud and a
little too early. But there may be a time when we really do have to cry wolf. GC: But see —
one of the most important things to me is how the conservative media handles Trump. Will
they call him out when things are not true, or will they just go along with it? To me,
that is what is essential in this entire discussion, because when you have followers of
somebody who don't really care if he tells the truth or not, that can be very dangerous.
So to me, it's: How is the conservative media going to respond to it? I mean, you've been
calling them out. But how will other forms of conservative media deal with that as we move
forward? DB: It's all shifted, though. The conservative media used to be Fox or Charles
Krauthammer or George Will. They're no longer the conservative media. Now there's another
whole set of institutions further right, which is Breitbart and Infowars, Alex Jones,
Laura Ingraham, and so they're the ones who are now his base, not even so much Fox. CA: My
last question for the time being is just on this question of the truth.

I mean, it's one of the scariest things to people right now, that there is no agreement,
nationally, on what is true. I've never seen anything like it, where facts are so
massively disputed. Your whole newspaper, sir, is delivering fake news every day. DB: And
failing.

CA: And failing. My commiserations. But is there any path whereby we can start to get some
kind of consensus, to believe the same things? Can online communities play a role here?
How do we fix this? GC: See, I understand how that happened. That's another groundswell
kind of emotion that was going on in the middle of America and not being heard, in
thinking that the mainstream media was biased. There's a difference, though, between being
biased and being fake. To me, that is a very important distinction in this conversation.
So let's just say that there was some bias in the mainstream media. OK. So there are ways
to try and mend that. But what Trump's doing is nuclearizing that and saying, "Look, we're
just going to call all of that fake." That's where it gets dangerous. CA: Do you think
enough of his supporters have a greater loyalty to the truth than to any ... Like, the
principle of not supporting something that is demonstrably not true actually matters, so
there will be a correction at some point? DB: I think the truth eventually comes
out.

So for example, Donald Trump has based a lot of his economic policy on this supposition
that Americans have lost manufacturing jobs because they've been stolen by the Chinese.
That is maybe 13 percent of the jobs that left. The truth is that 87 percent of the jobs
were replaced by technology. That is just the truth. And so as a result, when he says,
"I'm going to close TPP and all the jobs will come roaring back," they will not come
roaring back. So that is an actual fact, in my belief. And —

GC: But I'm saying what his supporters think is the truth, no matter how many times you
might say that, they still believe him. DB: But eventually either jobs will come back or
they will not come back, and at that point, either something will work or it doesn't work,
and it doesn't work or not work because of great marketing, it works because it actually
addresses a real problem and so I happen to think the truth will out. CA: If you've got a
question, please raise your hand here. Yael Eisenstat: I'll speak into the box. My name's
Yael Eisenstat. I hear a lot of this talk about how we all need to start talking to each
other more and understanding each other more, and I've even written about this, published
on this subject as well, but now today I keep hearing liberals — yes, I live in New York,
I can be considered a liberal — we sit here and self-analyze: What did we do to not
understand the Rust Belt? Or: What can we do to understand Middle America
better?

And what I'd like to know: Have you seen any attempts or conversations from Middle America
of what can I do to understand the so-called coastal elites better? Because I'm just
offended as being put in a box as a coastal elite as someone in Middle America is as being
considered a flyover state and not listened to. CA: There you go, I can hear Facebook
cheering as you —

DB: I would say — and this is someone who has been conservative all my adult life — when
you grow up conservative, you learn to speak both languages. Because if I'm going to
listen to music, I'm not going to listen to Ted Nugent. So a lot of my favorite rock bands
are all on the left. If I'm going to go to a school, I'm going probably to school where
the culture is liberal. If I'm going to watch a sitcom or a late-night comedy show, it's
going to be liberal. If I'm going to read a good newspaper, it'll be the New York Times.
As a result, you learn to speak both languages. And that actually, at least for a number
of years, when I started at National Review with William F. Buckley, it made us sharper,
because we were used to arguing against people every day. The problem now that's happened
is you have ghettoization on the right and you can live entirely in rightworld, so as a
result, the quality of argument on the right has diminished, because you're not in the
other side all the time.

But I do think if you're living in Minnesota or Iowa or Arizona, the coastal elites make
themselves aware to you, so you know that language as well, but it's not the reverse. CA:
But what does Middle America not get about coastal elites? So the critique is, you are not
dealing with the real problems. There's a feeling of a snobbishness, an elitism that is
very off-putting. What are they missing? If you could plant one piece of truth from the
mindset of someone in this room, for example, what would you say to them? DB: Just how
insanely wonderful we are.

No, I reject the category. The problem with populism is the same problem with elitism.
It's just a prejudice on the basis of probably an over-generalized social class
distinction which is too simplistic to apply in reality. Those of us in New York know
there are some people in New York who are completely awesome, and some people who are
pathetic, and if you live in Iowa, some people are awesome and some people are pathetic.
It's not a question of what degree you have or where you happen to live in the country.
The distinction is just a crude simplification to arouse political power. GC: But I would
encourage people to watch a television news show or read a column that they normally
wouldn't. So if you are a Trump supporter, watch the other side for a day, because you
need to come out of the bubble if you're ever going to have a conversation. And both sides
— so if you're a liberal, then watch something that's very conservative.

Read a column that is not something you would normally read, because then you gain
perspective of what the other side is thinking, and to me, that's a start of coming
together. I worry about the same thing you worry about, these bubbles. I think if you only
watch certain entities, you have no idea what the rest of the world is talking about. DB: I
think not only watching, being part of an organization that meets at least once a month
that puts you in direct contact with people completely unlike yourself is something we all
have a responsibility for. I may get this a little wrong, but I think of the top-selling
automotive models in this country, I think the top three or four are all pickup trucks. So
ask yourself: How many people do I know who own a pickup truck? And it could be very few
or zero for a lot of people. And that's sort of a warning sign kind of a problem. Where
can I join a club where I'll have a lot in common with a person who drives a pickup truck
because we have a common interest in whatever? CA: And so the internet is definitely
contributing to this.

A question here from Chris Ajemian: "How do you feel structure of communications,
especially the prevalence of social media and individualized content, can be used to bring
together a political divide, instead of just filing communities into echo chambers?" I
mean, it looks like Facebook and Google, since the election, are working hard on this
question. They're trying to change the algorithms so that they don't amplify fake news to
the extent that it happened last time round. Do you see any other promising signs of
...?GC: ... or amplify one side of the equation. CA: Exactly. GC: I think that was the
constant argument from the right, that social media and the internet in general was
putting articles towards the top that were not their worldview. I think, again, that fed
into the anger. It fed into the anger of: "You're pushing something that's not what I
believe." But social media has obviously changed everything, and I think Trump is the
example of Twitter changing absolutely everything.

And from his point of view, he's reaching the American people without a filter, which he
believes the media is. CA: Question from the audience. Destiny: Hi. I'm Destiny. I have a
question regarding political correctness, and I'm curious: When did political correctness
become synonymous with silencing, versus a way that we speak about other people to show
them respect and preserve their dignity? GC: Well, I think the conservative media really
pounded this issue for the last 10 years. I think that they really, really spent a lot of
time talking about political correctness, and how people should have the ability to say
what they think. Another reason why Trump became so popular: because he

<!--
ad_duration=3.33
comment_count=61
event="TED Dialogues"
external_start_time=0
intro_duration=11.82
is_subtitle_required="False"
is_talk_featured="True"
language="en"
language_swap="False"
native_language="en"
number_of_related_talks=6
number_of_speakers=4
number_of_subtitled_videos=14
number_of_tags=21
number_of_talk_download_languages=14
number_of_talk_more_resources=0
number_of_talk_recommendations=0
number_of_talks_take_actions=0
post_ad_duration=0.83
published_timestamp="2017-04-03 21:50:55"
recording_date="2017-03-01"
speaker_description="TV journalist, women's empowerment advocate"
speaker_is_published=1
speaker_name="Gretchen Carlson, David Brooks"
talk_name="Political common ground in a polarized United States"
talks_tags=["collaboration","communication","democracy","government","future","history","humanity","immigration","identity","inequality","infrastructure","journalism","policy","news","security","politics","social-media","social-change","women","united-states","writing"]
url_audio="https://download.ted.com/talks/GretchenCarlsonandDavidBrooks_2017S.mp3?apikey=acme-roadrunner"
url_photo_speaker="https://pe.tedcdn.com/images/ted/c2f9ef3589dd5b834a7173a01c1051ef263e5c44_254x191.jpg"
url_webpage="https://www.ted.com/talks/gretchen_carlson_david_brooks_political_common_ground_in_a_polarized_united_states"
video_type_name="TED Stage Talk"
-->