---
title: The aesthetics of survival
speaker: Hari Nef
description: >-
 Trans actress, model and writer Hari Nef scrutinizes the concept of passing as a
 transgender woman and using feminization as a survival tactic. "Hair, makeup and
 nails keep us strong and safe; does that make us sellouts? Or survivors?" In her
 talk, Nef boldly investigates trans femininity, asking the question: Why are we
 shamed for being femme?
date: 2016-04-16
tags: ["lgbt","social-change","transgender","gender","women","gender-spectrum","gender-equality","identity","violence","culture"]
slug: hari_nef_the_aesthetics_of_survival
---

Remember when Caitlyn Jenner revealed herself on the cover of "Vanity Fair"? Yeah.

I've got a lot to say about her conservative politics and her bumpy advocacy, but this,
this was cool. Most of you agreed with me. Not all of you, however. Like any woman in the
public eye, Caitlyn's appearance in particular came under scrutiny. "Caitlyn Jenner's idea
of a woman is a cleavage-boosting corset, sultry poses, thick mascara, banter about hair
and makeup; nail polish does not a woman make." "I feel slammed by the decision to portray
Ms. Jenner on the cover of 'Vanity Fair', as the stereotypical male fantasy of a woman.
It's sexist, no matter who does it." "I fully support Caitlyn Jenner, but I wish she
hadn't chosen to come out as a sex babe." These quotations source from Elinor Burkett,
Barbara Cohn Schlachet, and Susan Ager, non-trans women with roots in the second wave
feminist movement of the 70s and early 80s. Their, perhaps dated, aesthetic preferences of
feminist Liberalism clash with femme aesthetics; in this case, trans-femme
aesthetics.

But if you ask me, hair, makeup and nails don't make trans women like me or any women for
that matter, bad feminists. Sure, what if Caitlyn had appeared on the cover of Vanity Fair
in a pantsuit with no makeup, her hair pulled back, arms crossed? I think she would've
looked really cool, but would we all have accepted her so readily as a woman? Would she
have appeared on the cover of Vanity Fair to begin with? It's time for the aesthetics of
upwardly mobile feminist respectability to make room for the aesthetics of survival,
particularly trans survival. It's time to revise what a feminist looks like; especially if
hair, makeup, and nails allow her to get jobs, make friends or ride the subway home safely
at night. It's time to free the femme, because some of us need it or just like it, and
that's OK. This charming 1979 text is called, "The transsexual empire: the making of the
she-male." It was written by Elinor Burkett, a second wave radical feminist.

The thesis of this text is essentially that: one, trans women aren't women; two, trans
women are bad for feminist progress. Raymond confesses in the conclusion of the text that
she hopes that with enough work, transsexuality - as she calls it - will eventually be
morally mandated out of existence. In 1979, shortly after this book was published, Johns
Hopkins, the first US medical institution to offer life-saving, gender confirmation
surgery, phased out the procedure and dismantled its Gender Identity Committee after
coming under fire in this text. Raymond hypothesizes, "If the transsexual merely exchanges
one gender role for another, and if the outcome is to endorse a femininity which, in many
transsexuals, becomes a caricature of much that feminists have rejected about man-made
femininity, then where is the challenge, the transgression, and the breaking of any real
boundaries?" I believe that Raymond's call for women to break real gender boundaries is a
call we should answer.

But do we we have to answer with our bodies? Is it our fault, if the dominant, man-made
beauty ideals exclude the bodies that most of us were born with? And, is it bad, if we
want to do something about that make a couple of changes? Because men are scary pigs, and
patriarchy is real. 

If hair, makeup, and nails, hormones even, If those things keep us strong and safe, then,
I don't know. Does that make us sell-outs or survivors? Speaking of hair and makeup, I
love Lana Del Rey! 

I love her so much. In a 2014 edition of The New Inquiry, my good friend Sarah Nicole
Prickett analyzes the pop-starâ€™s image. "Two years ago, the prevailing male establishment
appeared to not like Lana Del Rey one bit. The New York Times' John Caramanica called her
a poser, a meme, and a has-been suggesting that she could only try again after washing off
that face paint and mussing up that hair. In other words, Lana Del Rey should have done a
better job of passing, of being a 'natural woman.'" One, I relate. Are there any trans
girls in the room? No? Ah, my stats were wrong. Passing as a natural woman can decide
whether I have a good day or a bad day. It sucks, but it is what it is. Number two. Wow.
Thirty-five years after the publication of "The transsexual empire," Raymond's preferred
femme-free aesthetics of second wave feminism have become the mainstream aesthetics
expected by the bro-literati of women. Yikes.

Prickett continues - Here's another picture of Del Rey; Whoops! Should I have shown you
that? - that, "Lana Del Rey's rejection of upwardly mobile feminism and/or high-class
femininity in favor of fatalistic glamor makes her a gender deserter to some, but a
godsend to most. When girls and women are meant to choose chic, studied effortlessness,
Lana's truth is an alternative, a man-loving woman. Read 'man' unliterally, as something
big and impossible to get out from money, a whole damn country ..." Under patriarchy,
money and country inscribe themselves on women's bodies. We look in the mirror, and we ask
ourselves, "Do I look like a rich woman today?" We look in the mirror and say, "Do I look
like an American woman today?" We look in the mirror and say, "Do I look like a beautiful
woman today?" And if I don't look rich, beautiful, and American, Am I still a woman? Lana
Del Rey and Caitlyn Jenner merely fit the bill we were all charged, and I don't blame them
for that.

If the aesthetics of money and country are, as Prickett argues impossible to get out from,
then, why are we being shamed for working it out underneath them? Here's a picture of me,
before I started transitioning, or I had started transitioning but I hadn't started
medical transition yet. At this point in my life, I wore a full face of makeup every day,
I shaved my whole body every week which covered me in these angry red spots. I stopped
cutting my hair. I wore dresses to morning classes. I started hormones: pills twice a day
and a needle in my leg every week. I started going in for a monthly laser hair removal
appointments, procedures that were so painful, that I had to chug a flask of vodka before
every session just so I would feel it less. I starved myself and abused laxatives so I
could fit the clothes I wanted to wear. I did all this because I wanted a body that
allowed me to do the things I wanted to do in the way I wanted to do them.

Things men in this country aren't really allowed to do. I tried to do them in the body I
was born with, but people told me, "No, you can't. "You have to soften up your face, get
rid of all your body hair; get breasts, shrink your waist, get a vagina." Of course, I
looked them right in the eye said, "Fuck you," turned around, and did pretty much all of
what they told me to do. 

It hurt, and it worked. If my story, or journey sounds difficult or tough, I can guarantee
you, it's even more difficult and more tough for the vast majority of trans women. In
2002, a trans woman named Gwen Araujo was beaten and strangled to death by four men upon
their discovery that Gwen, despite her femme appearance, was not assigned female at birth.
In 2013, Islan Nettles was slaughtered under similar circumstances. In 2014, Jennifer
Laude was slaughtered under similar circumstances by a US marine. In 2016, January, Monica
Loera was slaughtered under similar circumstances. Worldwide, a trans person is
slaughtered every three days. The vast majority of these victims are trans women of color,
and the vast majority of the discovered murderers are men, dissatisfied with our
embodiment of femininity, dissatisfied by trans femininity. Men who judge us to be not
femme enough. It is so hard to gain access to hormones to jump through all the medical
hoops.

It is so expensive to buy cosmetics, new clothes, healthy food, any number of means
towards body feminization. Even if a trans woman does manage to look or seem femme, her
race, her class, or her citizenship can place further targets on her back. So, when it
comes to trans women with limited resources, their femme can be the difference between
life and death. So, I got to ask: why are we being shamed for our femme? Let femmes be
femmes, if they want to be femme, because some of us need it or just want it, and that's
OK. When the aesthetics of feminist respectability exclude and erase the women who need,
not just want, need to give them up, then the aesthetics of feminist respectability need
to change. Femme aesthetics aren't bad or good. They just work. They just are. They work
for some of us. So, chill out. 

Let us live. Free the Femme. Thank you. 

<!--
ad_duration=0
event="TEDxConnecticutCollege"
external_start_time=0
intro_duration=0
is_subtitle_required="False"
is_talk_featured="False"
language="en"
language_swap="False"
native_language="en"
number_of_related_talks=6
number_of_speakers=1
number_of_subtitled_videos=0
number_of_tags=10
number_of_talk_download_languages=2
number_of_talk_more_resources=0
number_of_talk_recommendations=0
number_of_talks_take_actions=0
post_ad_duration=0
published_timestamp="2020-06-19 01:14:45"
recording_date="2016-04-16"
speaker_is_published=0
speaker_name="Hari Nef"
talk_name="The aesthetics of survival"
talks_tags=["lgbt","social-change","transgender","gender","women","gender-spectrum","gender-equality","identity","violence","culture"]
url_photo_talk="https://s3.amazonaws.com/talkstar-photos/uploads/e55f1ffe-bffb-41af-900a-69e0bd1d36cd/Hari+Nef+Set+1.jpeg"
url_webpage="https://www.ted.com/talks/hari_nef_the_aesthetics_of_survival"
video_type_name="TEDx Talk"
-->