---
title: What archaeology and DNA can teach us about prehistoric migration
speaker: Ian Barnes
description: >-
 In 2018, biomolecular archaeologist Ian Barnes' team at the Natural History
 Museum in London ascertained that Cheddar Man—the oldest near-complete human
 skeleton discovered in the British Isles—had dark skin and light eyes. Their
 findings challenged the views that many groups had long held about Britain's
 racial heritage. In this talk, Barnes describes how biomolecular archaeology is
 transforming the way we think about racial migration in prehistoric times.
date: 2018-07-01
tags: ["science-hard","archaeology","history","biology","race"]
slug: ian_barnes_what_archaeology_and_dna_can_teach_us_about_prehistoric_migration
---

Hello everyone. So, I'm going to talk today about migration and movement, and particularly
people moving into the British Isles in the past. And if we think about past migrations
into Britain, we probably first off might have some ideas about the 20th century, people
coming from the Caribbean, from east Africa, or from India, or Pakistan, or places like
that. And if we have to go back a bit further in time, of course we've got people like the
Normans, Romans or the Vikings. But despite the fact that we've noticed quite a lot of
people who have moved into Britain at different times, I don't think we really think of
ourselves as a migrant nation. We think of ourselves more outside as an island nation. But
what about if we go back really a long way, we really go back far in time beyond the time
when there is any notion of a Britain or an England, beyond any kind of english language,
in fact beyond written history at all.

In fact, we can go so far back in time that Britain is actually not even an island at all.
It's still joined to the continent, still part of the Eurasian landmass. So that's what I
want to talk to you about today, about Britain in prehistory, and the prehistory of
migration here. So we're going to take a big jump back in time, but I can't do that with
you all in one go. So we are going to take little jumps first. We are going to jump back
to the late Victorian period, and we're going to start off here. Here, we start in
Somerset at Cheddar Gorge. It is here during the last decades of the 19th century, that
this guy, Richard Cox Gough, discovered and excavated and blasted out a series of caves
that he made into a major tourist attraction or a showcase. But it's actually a year
after Richard died that the really big discovery was made, the one we're actually
interested in. So that discovery was made in December, 1903, and it was made by Richard's
son, Arthur, who was digging a drainage ditch to try to combat the seasonal flooding that
they had in the caves.

They tended to make all their big discoveries in the winter because that's when there
weren't any tourists around. So workmen who were working on the cave actually blasted out
and uncovered the skeleton of an adult male. And rather quickly, this skeleton made big
news. Experts of the day said that perhaps it was the body of the first Englishman, and
that he was of extreme importance, that he was at least 40,000 years old and perhaps as
much as 80,000 years old. Well, that's not entirely true. What we actually know today is
that "Cheddar Man," as he became known, Is actually about 10,000 years old, but he is
still certainly very important. He's extremely important for a number of reasons. Firstly
because he is the only near-complete skeleton that we have from that kind of time period.
He is also important because he's the only one where we have a complete skull or
near-complete skull. And here is the skull, in this rather post-setting with the two
brothers, William and Arthur, staring at it.

They seem to be enjoying themselves which is what I really like about this picture.

So what else do we know about Cheddar Man? Well, he's definitely a man. And that has been
the subject of a little bit debate over the years because he has a rather gracile and
slender skeleton. He was probably in his early twenties when he died; he was buried
deliberately, it seems, and he was buried on his own. Today, he looks something like this.
This guy has been better assembled, and you can see him at the Natural History Museum. He
is on display a couple of galleries away from where my office is. So, we've worked on
Cheddar Man and a number of other individuals over the years and built together quite a
large complex project exploring the history of the British Isles. And one of the things
that came up as the result of that project was the opportunity to take part in a channel 4
documentary where we were going to explore Cheddar Man and his history to build up more of
a story about him.

So that was good because we already had quite a lengthy project working on the history of
the British Isles, but what the people who put the documentary together wanted to know
about was something a little bit more complicated, more detailed, and that was about his
appearance, about his skin color, hair color and eye color. And what we were able to do
for them was to supply that information. We passed it on to the people who made the
reconstruction. Well, they came back with this, an individual with a rather small face
compared to the overall size of his head, with blue eyes, dark curly hair, and obviously
with dark skin. And that was a surprise for some people, for most of the people I talked
to actually. And most of them actually seem to think that this was rather cool. People who
saw the show generally quite enjoyed it. We weren't particularly surprised by this because
similar information had already been generated by a group, a couple of year previously,
looking at different skeletons around Europe of a similar kind of age.

They had already identified that dark skin was practically normal for people about 10,000
years ago. But what we've been able to do was better quantify exactly how dark that was.
And we've done that using a tool borrowed from forensic sciences. Some people didn't think
that this was very cool. Some people I think were expecting to see something a little bit
more like this, which is the results of the previous reconstruction. Both reconstructions
are obviously quite different, but they do share one feature at least which is this rather
wispy facial hair. And I'm surprised about that because there's really no evidences either
way, from the archeological genetic data, that would tend to actually suggest that. But
that is perhaps their only shared feature actually. So those people, who didn't think it
was very cool, were a bit surprised, and they made their surprise known on social media,
as you might expect. And actually things got rather heated there, and you can look at
that.

Right now I don't really want to go into too much detail about it. But here's one of the
sort of slightly odd events that happened there, one of my childhood heroes indirectly ...

... indirectly congratulating me on having upset some people. So that was a little bit
weird actually. And that went on for a while. So, what became clear to us was something
rather disappointing. As I've already said to you, we had spent quite a bit of time
getting a pretty good understanding of what the population history of British Isles
actually looks like. So how do you get from someone like this to people in the audience
today? I mean Cheddar Man obviously not Billy Bragg! So that's what I'm going to go
through now, what we're going to have a look at. Okay, but before we can do that we have
to work out how exactly we're going to look at that information. We really have a lot of
data here. The human genome has 3.2 billion base pairs and I can't just keep flashing that
up because we'd run out of time quite quickly. So what we need to do is find a way of
crunching those data down and just pulling out the most important and interesting parts of
it.

And the method that we often use just to get a handle on the data initially is called the
"principal components analysis," and that's what I'm going to show you here. So these are
genome data that has been squashed down onto something that looks a bit like a graph or a
plot. And so individuals who are close together are genetically similar to each other,
regardless of where they might happen to come from. So let's start here with Cheddar Man.
But all alone, like he was in Gough's cave, he's not actually doing much for us, he's not
telling us very much. So let's put on the other five individuals from Britain, from which
we have very small amounts of genome sequenced data, and see what happens. What happens
then is that they all plot together quite neatly. Despite the fact that we have
individuals here from Scotland, Wales and southwest England, they actually all look quite
similar to each other. Let's expand the search a bit more across the rest of
Europe.

What we have here are some more individuals. The ones in blue are older individuals,
slightly older ones from slightly earlier time periods. The ones in that kind of dark red
color are of a similar age. And these are samples that have been taken from Spain,
Hungary, Germany, Sweden, Luxembourg, all sorts of places including Britain. And what you
see is that the British ones kind of bridge the gap between the earlier and later ones.
But there's still not much of a picture here. Where we do get a bit of a surprise is if we
jump forward in time a bit more. Okay, so what we have here, about 4000 years after
Cheddar Man died, is that something quite surprising happened in Britain, and that's the
origins of farming. So the first farmers had arrived in Europe several thousands years
earlier. They had arrived in Greece. They are the red folks on that plot. They'd made they
way across Europe over several millennia and eventually arrived in Britain where we have
the grey individuals on the plot.

What you can see there about those grey people is that we have two important things to get
out of this. They are genetically extremely different to the hunter-gatherers that were in
Britain at that time. And they entirely replaced them, a complete replacement of the
population. Now it's always tempting at these points to think of some kind of vast horde
arriving and committing some kind of genocidal act on the people, the peaceful
hunter-gatherer people. We don't have any evidence for that at all. So what we think in
fact is quite plausible is that there were actually remarkably few people in the British
Isles at this time. [Farmers] arrive and just take over. And they can easily take over the
country. What is even more surprising is that a very similar thing happens about 1300
years later. A second genetically very distinct group arrives in the British Isles. These
are the so-called "Beaker people" who are called that because of the distinctive ceramic
vessels that they're often buried with.

These Beaker people were also genetically very different and seem to completely replace
the Neolithic people there, the farmers that were there before. And this, it seems, is the
last major population replacement that we can detect at the resolution that we can work
with at the moment, with ancient DNA data. So if we bring up now the modern population
across Europe, you can see that those Beaker people sit pretty much on top of current
British Isles populations and, in fact, the populations of northwestern Europe continents
in a bit of smear across there as well. Okay, so what can we draw from this? What do we
really have to conclude here? One of the things that I realized some time after we've
done this work and the documentary show was that for some people who are upset by the way
we had reconstructed Cheddar Man, the issue was one of population continuity. We had
challenged that notion that they had that there was a long-term population continuity in
Britain.

And that's very much not what the data seem to be saying. The history and the prehistory
of Britain is one where populations are under a series of replacements. The other thing
that you can also draw from this data is about migration and our modern day concerns about
mass migration and how it affects society. What you can see here is that the scale of
migration today, despite the advent of globalization and mass transportation, is nothing
like the kind of migrations that we must have had in the past that have led to these very
large-scale replacements. Thanks very much. 

<!--
ad_duration=0
event="TEDxLondon"
external_start_time=0
intro_duration=0
is_subtitle_required="False"
is_talk_featured="False"
language="en"
language_swap="False"
native_language="en"
number_of_related_talks=6
number_of_speakers=1
number_of_subtitled_videos=0
number_of_tags=5
number_of_talk_download_languages=3
number_of_talk_more_resources=0
number_of_talk_recommendations=0
number_of_talks_take_actions=0
post_ad_duration=0
published_timestamp="2018-07-19 15:52:16"
recording_date="2018-07-01"
speaker_description="Research leader and ancient DNA specialist"
speaker_is_published=0
speaker_name="Ian Barnes"
talk_name="What archaeology and DNA can teach us about prehistoric migration"
talks_tags=["science-hard","archaeology","history","biology","race"]
url_photo_talk="https://s3.amazonaws.com/talkstar-photos/uploads/59f4e0f4-d222-4b52-a71f-d8132e488ad2/Ian+Barnes.jpeg"
url_webpage="https://www.ted.com/talks/ian_barnes_what_archaeology_and_dna_can_teach_us_about_prehistoric_migration"
video_type_name="TEDx Talk"
-->