---
title: Why we need gender-neutral bathrooms
speaker: Ivan Coyote
description: >-
 There are a few things that we all need: fresh air, water, food, shelter, love
 ... and a safe place to pee. For trans people who don't fit neatly into the
 gender binary, public restrooms are a major source of anxiety and the place where
 they are most likely to be questioned or harassed. In this poetically rhythmic
 talk, Ivan Coyote grapples with complex and intensely personal issues of gender
 identity and highlights the need for gender-neutral bathrooms in all public
 places.
date: 2015-11-14
tags: ["design","gender","gender-spectrum","future","lgbt","social-change","identity","tedx","storytelling","transgender"]
slug: ivan_coyote_why_we_need_gender_neutral_bathrooms
---

There are a few things that all of us need. We all need air to breathe. We need clean
water to drink. We need food to eat. We need shelter and love. You know. Love is great,
too. And we all need a safe place to pee.

Yeah? As a trans person who doesn't fit neatly into the gender binary, if I could change
the world tomorrow to make it easier for me to navigate, the very first thing I would do
is blink and create single stall, gender-neutral bathrooms in all public
places.

Trans people and trans issues, they've been getting a lot of mainstream media attention
lately. And this is a great and necessary thing, but most of that attention has been
focused on a very few individuals, most of whom are kinda rich and pretty famous, and
probably don't have to worry that much anymore about where they're going to pee in between
classes at their community college, or where they're going to get changed into their gym
strip at their public high school. Fame and money insulates these television star trans
people from most of the everyday challenges that the rest of us have to tackle on a daily
basis. Public bathrooms. They've been a problem for me since as far back as I can remember,
first when I was just a little baby tomboy and then later as a masculine-appearing,
predominantly estrogen-based organism.

Now, today as a trans person, public bathrooms and change rooms are where I am most likely
to be questioned or harassed. I've often been verbally attacked behind their doors. I've
been hauled out by security guards with my pants still halfway pulled up. I've been stared
at, screamed at, whispered about, and one time I got smacked in the face by a little old
lady's purse that from the looks of the shiner I took home that day I am pretty certain
contained at least 70 dollars of rolled up small change and a large hard candy
collection.

And I know what some of you are thinking, and you're mostly right. I can and do just use
the men's room most of the time these days. But that doesn't solve my change room
dilemmas, does it? And I shouldn't have to use the men's room because I'm not a man. I'm a
trans person. And now we've got these fearmongering politicians that keep trying to pass
these bathroom bills. Have you heard about these? They try to legislate to try and force
people like myself to use the bathroom that they deem most appropriate according to the
gender I was assigned at birth. And if these politicians ever get their way, in Arizona or
California or Florida or just last week in Houston, Texas, or Ottawa, well then, using the
men's room will not be a legal option for me either. And every time one of these
politicians brings one of these bills to the table, I can't help but wonder, you know,
just who will and exactly how would we go about enforcing laws like these. Right? Panty
checks? Really.

Genital inspections outside of bath change rooms at public pools? There's no legal or
ethical or plausible way to enforce laws like these anyway. They exist only to foster fear
and promote transphobia. They don't make anyone safer. But they do for sure make the world
more dangerous for some of us. And meanwhile, our trans children suffer. They drop out of
school, or they opt out of life altogether. Trans people, especially trans and
gender-nonconforming youth face additional challenges when accessing pools and gyms, but
also universities, hospitals, libraries. Don't even get me started on how they treat us in
airports. If we don't move now to make sure that these places are truly open and accessible
to everyone, then we just need to get honest and quit calling them public places. We need
to just admit that they are really only open for people who fit neatly into one of two
gender boxes, which I do not. I never have. And this starts very early. I know a little
girl.

She's the daughter of a friend of mine. She's a self-identified tomboy. I'm talking about
cowboy boots and Caterpillar yellow toy trucks and bug jars, the whole nine yards. One
time I asked her what her favorite color was. She told me, "Camouflage."

So that awesome little kid, she came home from school last October from her half day of
preschool with soggy pants on because the other kids at school were harassing her when she
tried to use the girls' bathroom. And the teacher had already instructed her to stay out
of the boys' bathroom. And she had drank two glasses of that red juice at the Halloween
party, and I mean, who can resist that red juice, right? It's so good. And she couldn't
hold her pee any longer. Her and her classmates were four years old. They already felt
empowered enough to police her use of the so-called public bathrooms. She was four years
old. She had already been taught the brutal lesson that there was no bathroom door at
preschool with a sign on it that welcomed people like her. She'd already learned that
bathrooms were going to be a problem, and that problem started with her and was hers
alone. So my friend asked me to talk to her little daughter, and I did.

I wanted to tell her that me and her mom were going to march on down and talk to that
school, and the problem was going to go away, but I knew that wasn't true. I wanted to
tell her that it was all going to get better when she got older, but I couldn't. So I
asked her to tell me the story of what had happened, asked her to tell me how it made her
feel. "Mad and sad," she told me. So I told her that she wasn't alone and that it wasn't
right what had happened to her, and then she asked me if I had ever peed in my pants
before. I said yes, I had, but not for a really long time.

Which of course was a lie, because you know how you hit, like, 42 or 43, and sometimes you
just, I don't know, you pee a little bit when you cough or sneeze, when you're running
upstairs, or you're stretching. Don't lie. It happens. Right? She doesn't need to know
that, I figure.

I told her, when you get older, your bladder is going to grow bigger, too. When you get
old like me, you're going to be able to hold your pee for way longer, I promised
her."Until you can get home?" she asked me. I said, "Yes, until you can get home." She
seemed to take some comfort in that. So let's just build some single stall, gender-neutral
bathrooms with a little bench for getting changed into your gym clothes. We can't change
the world overnight for our children, but we can give them a safe and private place to
escape that world, if only for just a minute. This we can do. So let's just do it. And if
you are one of those people who is sitting out there right now already coming up with a
list of reasons in your head why this is not a priority, or it's too expensive, or telling
yourself that giving a trans person a safe place to pee or get changed in supports a
lifestyle choice that you feel offends your morality, or your masculinity, or your
religious beliefs, then let me just appeal to the part of your heart that probably,
hopefully, does care about the rest of the population.

If you can't bring yourself to care enough about people like me, then what about women and
girls with body image issues? What about anyone with body image stuff going on? What about
that boy at school who is a foot shorter than his classmates, whose voice still hasn't
dropped yet? Hey? Oh, grade eight, what a cruel master you can be. Right? What about
people with anxiety issues? What about people with disabilities or who need assistance in
there? What about folks with bodies who, for whatever reason, don't fit into the
mainstream idea of what a body should look like? How many of us still feel shy or afraid
to disrobe in front of our peers, and how many of us allow that fear to keep us from
something as important as physical exercise? Would all those people not benefit from these
single stall facilities? We can't change transphobic minds overnight, but we can give
everybody a place to get changed in so that we can all get to work making the world safer
for all of us. Thank you for listening.

Thank you.

<!--
ad_duration=3.33
event="TEDxVancouver"
external_start_time=0
intro_duration=11.82
is_subtitle_required="False"
is_talk_featured="True"
language="en"
language_swap="False"
native_language="en"
number_of_related_talks=6
number_of_speakers=1
number_of_subtitled_videos=24
number_of_tags=10
number_of_talk_download_languages=25
number_of_talk_more_resources=0
number_of_talk_recommendations=0
number_of_talks_take_actions=0
post_ad_duration=0.83
published_timestamp="2016-02-26 15:28:32"
recording_date="2015-11-14"
speaker_description="Writer, performer"
speaker_is_published=1
speaker_name="Ivan Coyote"
talk_name="Why we need gender-neutral bathrooms"
talks_tags=["design","gender","gender-spectrum","future","lgbt","social-change","identity","tedx","storytelling","transgender"]
url_audio="https://download.ted.com/talks/IvanCoyote_2015X.mp3?apikey=acme-roadrunner"
url_photo_speaker="https://pe.tedcdn.com/images/ted/a76d19b46a14642ffb92adfc449764067600a155_254x191.jpg"
url_photo_talk="https://s3.amazonaws.com/talkstar-photos/uploads/5925cc77-ba1f-49c9-91fe-073f0c03b35c/IvanCoyote_2015X-embed.jpg"
url_webpage="https://www.ted.com/talks/ivan_coyote_why_we_need_gender_neutral_bathrooms"
video_type_name="TEDx Talk"
-->