---
title: 3 kinds of bias that shape your worldview
speaker: J. Marshall Shepherd
description: >-
 What shapes our perceptions (and misperceptions) about science? In an eye-opening
 talk, meteorologist J. Marshall Shepherd explains how confirmation bias, the
 Dunning-Kruger effect and cognitive dissonance impact what we think we know --
 and shares ideas for how we can replace them with something much more powerful:
 knowledge.
date: 2018-03-22
tags: ["tedx","climate-change","science","culture","psychology","mind","personality"]
slug: j_marshall_shepherd_3_kinds_of_bias_that_shape_your_worldview
---

I'm a meteorologist by degree, I have a bachelor's, master's and PhD in physical
meteorology, so I'm a meteorologist, card carrying. And so with that comes four questions,
always. This is one prediction I will always get right.

And those questions are, "Marshall, what channel are you on?"

"Dr. Shepherd, what's the weather going to be tomorrow?"

And oh, I love this one: "My daughter is getting married next September, it's an outdoor
wedding. Is it going to rain?"

Not kidding, I get those, and I don't know the answer to that, the science isn't there.
But the one I get a lot these days is, "Dr. Shepherd, do you believe in climate change?"
"Do you believe in global warming?" Now, I have to gather myself every time I get that
question. Because it's an ill-posed question — science isn't a belief system. My son, he's
10 — he believes in the tooth fairy. And he needs to get over that, because I'm losing
dollars, fast.

But he believes in the tooth fairy. But consider this. Bank of America building, there, in
Atlanta. You never hear anyone say, "Do you believe, if you go to the top of that building
and throw a ball off, it's going to fall?" You never hear that, because gravity is a
thing. So why don't we hear the question, "Do you believe in gravity?" But of course, we
hear the question, "Do you believe in global warming?"Well, consider these facts. The
American Association for the Advancement of Science, AAAS, one of the leading
organizations in science, queried scientists and the public on different science topics.
Here are some of them: genetically modified food, animal research, human evolution. And
look at what the scientists say about those, the people that actually study those topics,
in red, versus the gray, what the public thinks. How did we get there? How did we get
there? That scientists and the public are so far apart on these science issues. Well, I'll
come a little bit closer to home for me, climate change.

Eighty-seven percent of scientists believe that humans are contributing to climate change.
But only 50 percent of the public? How did we get there? So it begs the question, what
shapes perceptions about science? It's an interesting question and one that I've been
thinking about quite a bit. I think that one thing that shapes perceptions in the public,
about science, is belief systems and biases. Belief systems and biases. Go with me for a
moment. Because I want to talk about three elements of that: confirmation bias,
Dunning-Kruger effect and cognitive dissonance. Now, these sound like big, fancy, academic
terms, and they are. But when I describe them, you're going to be like, "Oh! I recognize
that; I even know somebody that does that."Confirmation bias. Finding evidence that
supports what we already believe. Now, we're probably all a little bit guilty of that at
times. Take a look at this. I'm on Twitter.

And often, when it snows, I'll get this tweet back to me.

"Hey, Dr. Shepherd, I have 20 inches of global warming in my yard, what are you guys
talking about, climate change?" I get that tweet a lot, actually. It's a cute tweet, it
makes me chuckle as well. But it's oh, so fundamentally scientifically flawed. Because it
illustrates that the person tweeting doesn't understand the difference between weather and
climate. I often say, weather is your mood and climate is your personality. Think about
that. Weather is your mood, climate is your personality. Your mood today doesn't
necessarily tell me anything about your personality, nor does a cold day tell me anything
about climate change, or a hot day, for that matter. Dunning-Kruger. Two scholars from
Cornell came up with the Dunning-Kruger effect. If you go look up the peer-reviewed paper
for this, you will see all kinds of fancy terminology: it's an illusory superiority
complex, thinking we know things. In other words, people think they know more than they
do.

Or they underestimate what they don't know. And then, there's cognitive dissonance.
Cognitive dissonance is interesting. We just recently had Groundhog Day, right? Now,
there's no better definition of cognitive dissonance than intelligent people asking me if
a rodent's forecast is accurate.

But I get that, all of the time.

But I also hear about the Farmer's Almanac. We grew up on the Farmer's Almanac, people are
familiar with it. The problem is, it's only about 37 percent accurate, according to
studies at Penn State University. But we're in an era of science where we actually can
forecast the weather. And believe it or not, and I know some of you are like, "Yeah,
right," we're about 90 percent accurate, or more, with weather forecast. You just tend to
remember the occasional miss, you do.

So confirmation bias, Dunning-Kruger and cognitive dissonance. I think those shape biases
and perceptions that people have about science. But then, there's literacy and
misinformation that keep us boxed in, as well. During the hurricane season of 2017, media
outlets had to actually assign reporters to dismiss fake information about the weather
forecast. That's the era that we're in. I deal with this all the time in social media.
Someone will tweet a forecast — that's a forecast for Hurricane Irma, but here's the
problem: it didn't come from the Hurricane Center. But people were tweeting and sharing
this; it went viral. It didn't come from the National Hurricane Center at all. So I spent
12 years of my career at NASA before coming to the University of Georgia, and I chair
their Earth Science Advisory Committee, I was just up there last week in DC. And I saw
some really interesting things. Here's a NASA model and science data from satellite
showing the 2017 hurricane season.

You see Hurricane Harvey there? Look at all the dust coming off of Africa. Look at the
wildfires up in northwest US and in western Canada. There comes Hurricane Irma. This is
fascinating to me. But admittedly, I'm a weather geek. But more importantly, it
illustrates that we have the technology to not only observe the weather and climate
system, but predict it. There's scientific understanding, so there's no need for some of
those perceptions and biases that we've been talking about. We have knowledge. But think
about this ... This is Houston, Texas, after Hurricane Harvey. Now, I write a contribution
for "Forbes" magazine periodically, and I wrote an article a week before Hurricane Harvey
made landfall, saying, "There's probably going to be 40 to 50 inches of rainfall." I wrote
that a week before it happened. But yet, when you talk to people in Houston, people are
saying, "We had no idea it was going to be this bad." I'm just...

A week before. But — I know, it's amusing, but the reality is, we all struggle with
perceiving something outside of our experience level. People in Houston get rain all of
the time, they flood all of the time. But they've never experienced that. Houston gets
about 34 inches of rainfall for the entire year. They got 50 inches in three days. That's
an anomaly event, that's outside of the normal. So belief systems and biases, literacy and
misinformation. How do we step out of the boxes that are cornering our perceptions? Well
we don't even have to go to Houston, we can come very close to home.

Remember "Snowpocalypse?"

Snowmageddon? Snowzilla? Whatever you want to call it. All two inches of
it.

Two inches of snow shut the city of Atlanta down.

But the reality is, we were in a winter storm watch, we went to a winter weather advisory,
and a lot of people perceived that as being a downgrade, "Oh, it's not going to be as
bad." When in fact, the perception was that it was not going to be as bad, but it was
actually an upgrade. Things were getting worse as the models were coming in. So that's an
example of how we get boxed in by our perceptions. So, the question becomes, how do we
expand our radius? The area of a circle is "pi r squared". We increase the radius, we
increase the area. How do we expand our radius of understanding about science? Here are my
thoughts. You take inventory of your own biases. And I'm challenging you all to do that.
Take an inventory of your own biases. Where do they come from? Your upbringing, your
political perspective, your faith — what shapes your own biases? Then, evaluate your
sources — where do you get your information on science?

What do you read, what do you listen to, to consume your information on science? And then,
it's important to speak out. Talk about how you evaluated your biases and evaluated your
sources. I want you to listen to this little 40-second clip from one of the top TV
meteorologists in the US, Greg Fishel, in the Raleigh, Durham area. He's revered in that
region. But he was a climate skeptic. But listen to what he says about speaking out. Greg
Fishel: The mistake I was making and didn't realize until very recently, was that I was
only looking for information to support what I already thought, and was not interested in
listening to anything contrary. And so I woke up one morning, and there was this question
in my mind, "Greg, are you engaging in confirmation bias? Are you only looking for
information to support what you already think?" And if I was honest with myself, and I
tried to be, I admitted that was going on.

And so the more I talked to scientists and read peer-reviewed literature and tried to
conduct myself the way I'd been taught to conduct myself at Penn State when I was a
student, it became very difficult for me to make the argument that we weren't at least
having some effect. Maybe there was still a doubt as to how much, but to say "nothing" was
not a responsible thing for me to do as a scientist or a person. JMS: Greg Fishel just
talked about expanding his radius of understanding of science. And when we expand our
radius, it's not about making a better future, but it's about preserving life as we know
it. So as we think about expanding our own radius in understanding science, it's critical
for Athens, Georgia, for Atlanta, Georgia, for the state of Georgia, and for the world. So
expand your radius. Thank you.

<!--
ad_duration=3.33
comment_count=128
event="TEDxUGA"
external_start_time=0
has_talk_citation=1
intro_duration=11.82
is_subtitle_required="False"
is_talk_featured="True"
language="en"
language_swap="False"
native_language="en"
number_of_related_talks=6
number_of_speakers=1
number_of_subtitled_videos=23
number_of_tags=7
number_of_talk_download_languages=23
number_of_talk_more_resources=0
number_of_talk_recommendations=0
number_of_talks_take_actions=0
post_ad_duration=0.83
published_timestamp="2018-12-11 15:39:24"
recording_date="2018-03-22"
speaker_description="Meteorologist"
speaker_is_published=1
speaker_name="J. Marshall Shepherd"
talk_more_resources=[]
talk_name="3 kinds of bias that shape your worldview"
talks_tags=["tedx","climate-change","science","culture","psychology","mind","personality"]
talks_take_action=[]
url_audio="https://download.ted.com/talks/JMarshallShepherd_2018X.mp3?apikey=acme-roadrunner"
url_photo_speaker="https://pe.tedcdn.com/images/ted/adc80688a351ad83ec68b70eac881fa40f7f680e_254x191.jpg"
url_photo_talk="https://s3.amazonaws.com/talkstar-photos/uploads/90fadace-1be7-47c1-85d5-96a4355c2736/JMarshallShepherd_2018X-embed.jpg"
url_webpage="https://www.ted.com/talks/j_marshall_shepherd_3_kinds_of_bias_that_shape_your_worldview"
video_type_name="TEDx Talk"
-->