---
title: How I turned my Tourette's tics into art
speaker: Jess Thom
description: >-
 If you listen to visual artist Jess Thom speak, you'll notice she says the words
 "hedgehog" and "biscuit" -- a lot. Thom has Tourette's syndrome, but she doesn't
 let that stop her from finding humor in her condition and educating people about
 the disorder. In this funny talk, Thom busts common misconceptions about
 Tourette's and shows how she's turning her tics into toe-tapping works of
 art.
date: 2013-09-23
tags: ["art","health","personal-growth","society","identity"]
slug: jess_thom_how_i_turned_my_tourette_s_tics_into_art
---

Hello (biscuit) I'm Jess Thom, (biscuit) I'm an artist (biscuit) and part-time superhero.
(biscuit, biscuit) I have Tourette's syndrome (biscuit) a neurological condition (biscuit)
that causes involuntary (biscuit) movements and noises called tics. (biscuit, hedgehog,
biscuit) There are three things (biscuit) you need to know straight away. (biscuit)
Firstly, (biscuit) you're going to hear the words "biscuit" and "hedgehog" a lot in the
next few minutes. 

(biscuit, biscuit, hedgehog, biscuit) Secondly, (biscuit) several times a day, (biscuit)
my ticks suddenly intensify (biscuit) to a point where I completely lose control (biscuit)
of my body and speech. These episodes, which I call ticcing fits (biscuit) look seizure
like, and need similar management. If this happens while I'm speaking, (biscuit) my
support worker will come and help me (biscuit) and Daniel will take over. (biscuit,
hedgehog) Finally, (biscuit, biscuit) if I tic something funny (biscuit) you're absolutely
allowed to laugh. (biscuit) In fact, it'll be a bit odd if you don't. (biscuit, hedgehog)
I'm going to start by giving you a brief introduction to Tourette's, (biscuit) one of the
most misunderstood conditions on the planet. (biscuit, hedgehog, biscuit) Lot's of people
have heard of Tourette's (biscuit) but most of what they know is based on myths and
stereotypes. Let's get some of these out of the way now. (biscuit) Swearing.

Tourette's is often characterized as the swearing disease. But in fact, coprolalia
(biscuit) the (biscuit) the technical name (biscuit) for ticced, for ticced, for obscene
tics (biscuit) affects only 10% of people with the condition. (biscuit) I'm one of them
(biscuit) but (biscuit) but for me tic swearing makes up only a tiny fraction of what I
say involuntarily. (hedgehog, biscuit) Tourette's isn't a rare condition. (biscuit,
hedgehog) It's estimated to effect (biscuit) 300,000 people in the UK alone. (biscuit) It
impacts each person differently. (biscuit, hedgehog, biscuit, cat sex pajamas, biscuit) So
(biscuit) 

(Aladdin, biscuit, Aladdin died) He doesn't really, don't worry. (biscuit, biscuit)

(hedgehog, biscuit) Some people's tics (biscuit, biscuit) will be barely noticeable,
(biscuit) while others will behave in a way that makes them stand out. (biscuit) Everyone
with Tourette's (biscuit) will have multiple motor tics, and at least one vocal tic.
(biscuit) These (biscuit) these can be as simple as blinking. or as complex as jumping, or
saying things like: "The history of Iguanas can be written in a tea pot." (biscuit,
hedgehog, biscuit) Tourette's isn't saying what's on your mind. (biscuit) I don't think
about biscuits nearly as much as I talk about them. 

(biscuit, hedgehog) (Aladdin, biscuit, hedgehog) 

(biscuit) Anything (biscuit) I've ever known or experienced has the potential to become a
tic. (biscuit, hedgehog) Search (biscuit) search for Tourette's online (biscuit) and
you'll get simplistic definitions (biscuit) that never really convey (biscuit) the
experience of having it. (biscuit) My sister found a description in the Oxford Handbook of
Clinical Medicine. (biscuit) It says: "Tourette's is (biscuit, hedgehog, biscuit, biscuit)
expl (biscuit, biscuit, biscuit, biscuit) explo (biscuit) Explosive, occasionally obscene
verbal ejaculations and gestures." It goes on: "There may be a witty, innovatory,
phantasmagorical picture with mimicry, antics (biscuit) and playfulness." That's the
Tourette's I recognize. (hedgehog, biscuit) I've had tics since I was six. (biscuit, hey,
biscuit) As a child (biscuit) they were milder and less noticeable. (biscuit) Then in my
early twenties, (biscuit) they began to intensify, and have a bigger impact on my
life.

In 2010 I co-founded (biscuit) Touretteshero. (biscuit, hey, biscuit) An organization
(biscuit) that celebrates the humor and creativity of Tourette's. (biscuit) Before
starting Touretteshero, (biscuit) I found it hard to talk about Tourette's without tears.
A single phrase shifted my thinking. (biscuit) My friend Matthew (biscuit, hedgehog,
biscuit) described my tics (biscuit) as a crazy language-generating machine. (biscuit) He
told me (biscuit) not doing something creative with them (biscuit) would be wasteful. This
ide (biscuit) this idea took root and it helped me to see my tics as my power rather than
my problem. (biscuit) Through Touretteshero, (biscuit) I can recast the symptoms of my
condition (biscuit) as springboards for creativity. (biscuit, hedgehog) On the website
(biscuit) I invite (biscuit, biscuit, biscuit) on the website (biscuit) I share over 5,000
of my vocal tics (biscuit) and invite anyone to make art in response.

(biscuit, hedgehog) I propose (biscuit) that humor and creativity (biscuit) are key tools
(biscuit) in encouraging people to think more deeply about an often (biscuit) mocked
condition. (biscuit) Put simply, (biscuit) Touretteshero's mission is to change the world,
one tic at a time. (hedgehog, biscuit, biscuit, biscuit) Since the outset (biscuit) one of
the big aims (biscuit, biscuit, biscuit) has been to use the creativity and spontaneity of
Tourette's (biscuit) to capture the imaginations (biscuit) of scientists and academics
(biscuit) and encourage (biscuit) new generations of researchers (biscuit) to take an
interest in the condition. (Aladdin, biscuit) and (Aladdin, biscuit, hedgehog, biscuit) I
believe (biscuit) that innovative approaches (biscuit, biscuit) have an important role to
play (biscuit) in promoting increased (biscuit, biscuit) increased discussion and that
collaboration across disciplines (biscuit) offers opportunities for new understanding and
thinking.

(biscuit) It's easy to see (biscuit) how vocal tics with their vivid imagery (biscuit) can
be illustrated. (biscuit, biscuit) Or how the movements of motor tics could be
choreographed into dance. But what about the most distressing and debilitating aspects of
Tourette's? (biscuit) Can these be given over for transformation? (biscuit, hedgehog) I
don't just think they can, to me it's really important that they are. (biscuit) By far,
one of the most difficult aspects of Tourette's for me (biscuit) is my ticcing fits.
(biscuit) While these aren't a classic par (biscuit, biscuit) while these aren't part of
the classic presentation, (biscuit) they are experienced by others with the condition.
(hedgehog, biscuit) These episodes (biscuit) have been happening on and off for several
years. (biscuit, biscuit) But since October 2011, they've been a feature of my daily life.
(biscuit, biscuit) They happen several times (biscuit) in any 24 hours period (biscuit)
and could last from just a few minutes, to several hours.

(hedgehog, biscuit) They can happen anywhere (biscuit, biscuit) regardless of where I am,
or what I'm doing. (biscuit) Whether I'm at work, on a bus (biscuit, haa) or fast asleep.
I've had fits in front of sunsets and in the pouring rain. (biscuit) To.. (biscuit) To...
(biscuit) To explain what happens during these episodes (biscuit) I often use the analogy
of a fruit machine. (biscuit) A number of different things (biscuit) can happen but the
mix of what turns up in each fit is completely random. (biscuit) The key elements
(biscuit) are loss of speech, (biscuit) fast, frequent movement of my arms, legs and
stomach, (biscuit, biscuit) Dystonic tics that make (biscuit) that make my muscles go
tense (biscuit) and my body lock up, (biscuit) a deeply unpleasant choking tic (biscuit)
and a very painful gaping of my jaw. (cat sex pajamas, hello, biscuit, biscuit)

(hello, hedgehog, biscuit, biscuit) I'm imagining you all in bikinis. (hedgehog)

(biscuit) Not really. (hedgehog, biscuit) My support workers record (biscuit) information
about each fit. (biscuit, hedgehog) Where it hap... (biscuit) The start and end time,
(biscuit, biscuit) the severity, where it happened and what elements were present.
(biscuit) I gave a year's worth of this data (biscuit) to doctor (biscuit) Thomas
(biscuit) Doctor Thomas Mitchell and Professor Joseph Hyde. (biscuit) Tom's a music
technologist and lecturer (biscuit) at UWE (biscuit, hey, biscuit, biscuit) and Joe's
(Batman's cousin) (biscuit) and (biscuit, biscuit, biscuit) and (biscuit) and Joe's a
composer (biscuit) and (biscuit) and professor of creative music technology at Bath Spa
University. They have turned this data (biscuit) into a sound piece (biscuit) by
attributing sonic characteristics to the information generated by my (biscuit) by my fits.
(biscuit, hedgehog) Here is an extract from this (biscuit) from this piece that represents
two months (hedgehog, Aladdin) (Various sounds) (Various sounds) (bop, bop, bop, clink)
(Various sounds) (biscuit) (Various sounds) (tada!) (Various sounds) (biscuit) (Various
sounds) (biscuit, brup brup) (Various sounds) (ting!, hedgehog, biscuit, biscuit) (Various
sounds) (hedgehog, biscuit, yay) (Various sounds) (hedgehog, Aladdin) (Various sounds)
(biscuit, biscuit) (Various sounds) (biscuit, biscuit, cats) (Various sounds) (bop bop,
sexy cat, biscuit) (Various sounds) (hedgehog) (Various sounds) (biscuit, hedgehog, dada!)
(Various sounds) (biscuit) (Sounds end) (biscuit, biscuit) this (biscuit) this
collaboration (biscuit, biscuit) is an expression of an idea (biscuit) at the heart of
Tourette's syndrome.

(biscuit, biscuit) But even the most challenging aspects of the condition (biscuit) have
created potential. Utilizing this can help unlock new ways (biscuit) of seeing and
understanding (biscuit) complex experiences. But most importantly, it can help open minds.
(biscuit) My challenge to you (biscuit) is to make good use of your own powers. My
invitation is to enjoy and share in mine. (biscuit) Together (biscuit) we can change
attitudes (biscuit) and replace misconceptions (biscuit) with understanding. (biscuit,
hedgehog, biscuit, Aladdin, biscuit) We can encourage more people, we can make interesting
art along the way, (biscuit) and we can encourage more people to contributing to (biscuit)
to unraveling (biscuit, biscuit) the mysteries of Tourette's (biscuit) the mind (biscuit)
and the alchemy of chaos. And the biscuits (hedgehog) 

(biscuit, hedgehog, Aladdin) 

(biscuit) 

<!--
ad_duration=0
event="TEDxAlbertopolis"
external_start_time=0
intro_duration=0
is_subtitle_required="False"
is_talk_featured="False"
language="en"
language_swap="False"
native_language="en"
number_of_related_talks=6
number_of_speakers=1
number_of_subtitled_videos=0
number_of_tags=5
number_of_talk_download_languages=7
number_of_talk_more_resources=0
number_of_talk_recommendations=0
number_of_talks_take_actions=0
post_ad_duration=0
published_timestamp="2019-05-22 16:04:08"
recording_date="2013-09-23"
speaker_description="Comedian"
speaker_is_published=0
speaker_name="Jess Thom"
talk_name="How I turned my Tourette's tics into art"
talks_tags=["art","health","personal-growth","society","identity"]
url_photo_talk="https://s3.amazonaws.com/talkstar-photos/uploads/84e2344f-79f6-47e9-b781-131e6903680e/Jess+Thorn.jpeg"
url_webpage="https://www.ted.com/talks/jess_thom_how_i_turned_my_tourette_s_tics_into_art"
video_type_name="TEDx Talk"
-->