---
title: The beautiful, mysterious science of how you hear
speaker: Jim Hudspeth
description: >-
 Have you ever wondered how your ears work? In this delightful and fascinating
 talk, biophysicist Jim Hudspeth demonstrates the wonderfully simple yet
 astonishingly powerful mechanics of hair cells, the microscopic powerhouses that
 make hearing possible -- and explains how, when it's really quiet, your ears will
 begin to beam out a spectrum of sounds unique to you.
date: 2019-11-01
tags: ["science","biology","neuroscience","physics","senses","human-body","hearing"]
slug: jim_hudspeth_the_beautiful_mysterious_science_of_how_you_hear
---

Can you hear me OK?Audience: Yes. Jim Hudspeth: OK. Well, if you can, it's really amazing,
because my voice is changing the air pressure where you sit by just a few billionths of
the atmospheric level, yet we take it for granted that your ears can capture that
infinitesimal signal and use it to signal to the brain the full range of auditory
experiences: the human voice, music, the natural world. How does your ear do that? And the
answer to that is: through the cells that are the real hero of this presentation — the
ear's sensory receptors, which are called "hair cells."Now, these hair cells are
unfortunately named, because they have nothing at all to do with the kind of hair of which
I have less and less. These cells were originally named that by early microscopists, who
noticed that emanating from one end of the cell was a little cluster of bristles. With
modern electron microscopy, we can see much better the nature of the special feature that
gives the hair cell its name.

That's the hair bundle. It's this cluster of 20 to several hundred fine cylindrical rods
that stand upright at the top end of the cell. And this apparatus is what is responsible
for your hearing me right this instant. Now, I must say that I am somewhat in love with
these cells. I've spent 45 years in their company —

and part of the reason is that they're really beautiful. There's an aesthetic component to
it. Here, for example, are the cells with which an ordinary chicken conducts its hearing.
These are the cells that a bat uses for its sonar. We use these large hair cells from a
frog for many of our experiments. Hair cells are found all the way down to the most
primitive of fishes, and those of reptiles often have this really beautiful, almost
crystalline, order. But above and beyond its beauty, the hair bundle is an antenna. It's a
machine for converting sound vibrations into electrical responses that the brain can then
interpret. At the top of each hair bundle, as you can see in this image, there's a fine
filament connecting each of the little hairs, the stereocilia. It's here marked with a
little red triangle. And this filament has at its base a couple of ion channels, which are
proteins that span the membrane. And here's how it works. This rat trap represents an ion
channel.

It has a pore that passes potassium ions and calcium ions. It has a little molecular gate
that can be open, or it can be closed. And its status is set by this elastic band which
represents that protein filament. Now, imagine that this arm represents one stereocilium
and this arm represents the adjacent, shorter one with the elastic band between them. When
sound energy impinges upon the hair bundle, it pushes it in the direction towards its
taller edge. The sliding of the stereocilia puts tension in the link until the channels
open and ions rush into the cell. When the hair bundle is pushed in the opposite
direction, the channels close. And, most importantly, a back-and-forth motion of the hair
bundle, as ensues during the application of acoustic waves, alternately opens and closes
the channel, and each opening admits millions and millions of ions into the cell. Those
ions constitute an electrical current that excites the cell.

The excitation is passed to a nerve fiber, and then propagates into the brain. Notice that
the intensity of the sound is represented by the magnitude of this response. A louder
sound pushes the hair bundle farther, opens the channel longer, lets more ions in and
gives rise to a bigger response. Now, this mode of operation has the advantage of great
speed. Some of our senses, such as vision, use chemical reactions that take time. And as a
consequence of that, if I show you a series of pictures at intervals of 20 or 30 per
second, you get the sense of a continuous image. Because it doesn't use reactions, the
hair cell is fully 1,000 times faster than our other senses. We can hear sounds at
frequencies as great as 20,000 cycles per second, and some animals have ever faster ears.
The ears of bats and whales, for example, can respond to their sonar pulses at 150,000
cycles a second. But this speed doesn't entirely explain why the ear performs so
well.

And it turns out that our hearing benefits from an amplifier, something called the "active
process." The active process enhances our hearing and makes possible all the remarkable
features that I've already mentioned. Let me tell you how it works. First of all, the
active process amplifies sound, so you can hear, at threshold, sounds that move the hair
bundle by a distance of only about three-tenths of a nanometer. That's the diameter of one
water molecule. It's really astonishing. The system can also operate over an enormously
wide dynamic range. Why do we need this amplification? The amplification, in ancient
times, was useful because it was valuable for us to hear the tiger before the tiger could
hear us. And these days, it's essential as a distant early warning system. It's valuable
to be able to hear fire alarms or contemporary dangerous such as speeding fire engines or
police cars or the like.

When the amplification fails, our hearing's sensitivity plummets, and an individual may
then need an electronic hearing aid to supplant the damaged biological one. This active
process also enhances our frequency selectivity. Even an untrained individual can
distinguish two tones that differ by only two-tenths of a percent, which is one-thirtieth
of the difference between two piano notes, and a trained musician can do even better. This
fine discrimination is useful in our ability to distinguish different voices and to
understand the nuances of speech. And, again, if the active process deteriorates, it
becomes harder to carry out verbal communication. Finally, the active process is valuable
in setting the very broad range of sound intensities that our ears can tolerate, from the
very faintest sound that you can hear, such as a dropped pen, to the loudest sound that
you can stand — say, a jackhammer or a jet plane.

The amplitude of sounds spans a range of one millionfold, which is more than is
encompassed by any other sense or by any man-made device of which I'm aware. And again, if
this system deteriorates, an affected individual may have a hard time hearing the very
faintest sounds or tolerating the very loudest ones. Now, to understand how the hair cell
does its thing, one has to situate it within its environment within the ear. We learn in
school that the organ of hearing is the coiled, snail-shaped cochlea. It's an organ about
the size of a chickpea. It's embedded in the bone on either side of the skull. We also
learn that an optical prism can separate white light into its constituent frequencies,
which we see as distinct colors. In an analogous way, the cochlea acts as sort of an
acoustic prism that splits apart complex sounds into their component frequencies. So when
a piano is sounded, different notes blend together into a chord. The cochlea undoes that
process.

It separates them and represents each at a different position. In this picture, you can
see where three notes — middle C and the two extreme notes on a piano — are represented in
the cochlea. The lowest frequencies go all the way up to the top of the cochlea. The
highest frequencies, down to 20,000 Hz, go all the way to the bottom of the cochlea, and
every other frequency is represented somewhere in between. And, as this diagram shows,
successive musical tones are represented a few tens of hair cells apart along the cochlear
surface. Now, this separation of frequencies is really key in our ability to identify
different sounds, because very musical instrument, every voice, emits a distinct
constellation of tones. The cochlea separates those frequencies, and the 16,000 hair cells
then report to the brain how much of each frequency is present. The brain can then compare
all the nerve signals and decide what particular tone is being heard. But this doesn't
explain everything that I want to explain.

Where's the magic? I told you already about the great things that the hair cell can do.
How does it carry out the active process and do all the remarkable features that I
mentioned at the outset? The answer is instability. We used to think that the hair bundle
was a passive object, it just sat there, except when it was stimulated. But in fact, it's
an active machine. It's constantly using internal energy to do mechanical work and enhance
our hearing. So even at rest, in the absence of any input, an active hair bundle is
constantly trembling. It's constantly twitching back and forth. But when even a weak sound
is applied to it, it latches on to that sound and begins to move very neatly in a
one-to-one way with it, and by so doing, it amplifies the signal about a thousand
times. This same instability also enhances our frequency selectivity, for a given hair cell
tends to oscillate best at the frequency at which it normally trembles when it's not being
stimulated.

So, this apparatus not only gives us our remarkably acute hearing, but also gives us the
very sharp tuning. I want to offer you a short demonstration of something related to this.
I'll ask the people who are running the sound system to turn up its sensitivity at one
specific frequency. So just as a hair cell is tuned to one frequency, the amplifier will
now enhance a particular frequency in my voice. Notice how specific tones emerge more
clearly from the background. This is exactly what hair cells do. Each hair cell amplifies
and reports one specific frequency and ignores all the others. And the whole set of hair
cells, as a group, can then report to the brain exactly what frequencies are present in a
given sound, and the brain can determine what melody is being heard or what speech is
being intended. Now, an amplifier such as the public address system can also cause
problems. If the amplification is turned up too far, it goes unstable and begins to howl
or emit sounds.

And one wonders why the active process doesn't do the same thing. Why don't our ears beam
out sounds? And the answer is that they do. In a suitably quiet environment, 70 percent of
normal people will have one or more sounds coming out of their ears.

I'll give you an example of this. You will hear two emissions at high frequencies coming
from a normal human ear. You may also be able to discern background noise, like the
microphone's hiss, the gurgling of a stomach, the heartbeat, the rustling of
clothes.(Hums, microphone hiss, dampened taps, clothes rustling)This is typical. Most
ears emit just a handful of tones, but some can emit as many as 30. Every ear is unique,
so my right ear is different from my left, my ear is different from your ear, but unless
an ear is damaged, it continues to emit the same spectrum of frequencies over a period of
years or even decades. So what's going on? It turns out that the ear can control its own
sensitivity, its own amplification. So if you're in a very loud environment, like a
sporting event or a musical concert, you don't need any amplification, and the system is
turned down all the way. If you are in a room like this auditorium, you might have a
little bit of amplification, but of course the public address system does most of the work
for you.

And finally, if you go into a really quiet room where you can hear a pin drop, the system
is turned up almost all the way. But if you go into an ultraquiet room such as a sound
chamber, the system turns itself up to 11, it goes unstable and it begins to emit sound.
And these emissions constitute a really strong demonstration of just how active the hair
cell can be. So in the last minute, I want to turn to another question that might come up,
which is: Where do we go from here? And I would say that there are three issues that I
would really like to address in the future. The first is: What is the molecular motor
that's responsible for the hair cell's amplification? Somehow, nature has stumbled across
a system that can oscillate or amplify at 20,000 cycles per second, or even more. That's
much faster than any other biological oscillation, and we would like to understand where
it comes from. The second issue is how the hair cell's amplification is adjusted to deal
with the acoustic circumstances.

Who turns the knob to increase or decrease the amplification in a quiet or in a loud
environment? And the third issue is one that concerns all of us, which is what we can do
about the deterioration of our hearing. Thirty million Americans, and more than 400
million people worldwide, have significant problems on a daily basis with understanding
speech in a noisy environment or over the telephone. Many have even worse deficits.
Moreover, these deficits tend to get worse with time, because when human hair cells die,
they're not replaced by cell division. But we know that nonmammalian animals can replace
their cells, and those creatures' cells are dying and being replaced throughout life, so
the animals maintain normal hearing. Here's an example from a little zebra fish. The cell
at the top will undergo a division to produce two new hair cells. They dance for a little
bit, and then settle down and go to work. So we believe that if we can decode the molecular
signals that are used by these other animals to regenerate their hair cells, we'll be able
to do the same thing for humans.

And our group and many other groups are now engaged in research trying to resurrect these
amazing hair cells. Thank you for your attention.

<!--
ad_duration=3.33
comment_count=18
event="TED@NAS"
external_duration=0
external_start_time=0
has_talk_citation=1
intro_duration=11.82
is_subtitle_required="False"
is_talk_featured="True"
language="en"
language_swap="False"
native_language="en"
number_of_related_talks=6
number_of_speakers=1
number_of_subtitled_videos=12
number_of_tags=7
number_of_talk_download_languages=12
number_of_talk_more_resources=1
number_of_talk_recommendations=1
number_of_talks_take_actions=0
post_ad_duration=0.83
published_timestamp="2020-03-13 14:57:05"
recording_date="2019-11-01"
speaker_description="Biophysicist, neuroscientist"
speaker_is_published=1
speaker_name="Jim Hudspeth"
talk_name="The beautiful, mysterious science of how you hear"
talk_recommendations_blurb="More resources curated by Jim Hudspeth"
talks_tags=["science","biology","neuroscience","physics","senses","human-body","hearing"]
talks_take_action=[]
url_photo_speaker="https://pe.tedcdn.com/images/ted/933372781f05b04528a59fed077ee6a20a5bd763_254x191.jpg"
url_photo_talk="https://s3.amazonaws.com/talkstar-photos/uploads/3abf9883-9130-43a5-aae5-e2d375c82cf8/JimHudspeth_2019S-embed.jpg"
url_webpage="https://www.ted.com/talks/jim_hudspeth_the_beautiful_mysterious_science_of_how_you_hear"
video_type_name="TED Institute Talk"
-->