---
title: This could be why you're depressed or anxious
speaker: Johann Hari
description: >-
 In a moving talk, journalist Johann Hari shares fresh insights on the causes of
 depression and anxiety from experts around the world -- as well as some exciting
 emerging solutions. "If you're depressed or anxious, you're not weak and you're
 not crazy -- you're a human being with unmet needs," Hari says.
date: 2019-07-20
tags: ["depression","mental-health","illness","society","personal-growth","brain","humanity","relationships"]
slug: johann_hari_this_could_be_why_you_re_depressed_or_anxious
---

For a really long time, I had two mysteries that were hanging over me. I didn't understand
them and, to be honest, I was quite afraid to look into them. The first mystery was, I'm
40 years old, and all throughout my lifetime, year after year, serious depression and
anxiety have risen, in the United States, in Britain, and across the Western world. And I
wanted to understand why. Why is this happening to us? Why is it that with each year that
passes, more and more of us are finding it harder to get through the day? And I wanted to
understand this because of a more personal mystery. When I was a teenager, I remember going
to my doctor and explaining that I had this feeling, like pain was leaking out of me. I
couldn't control it, I didn't understand why it was happening, I felt quite ashamed of it.
And my doctor told me a story that I now realize was well-intentioned, but quite
oversimplified. Not totally wrong. My doctor said, "We know why people get like
this.

Some people just naturally get a chemical imbalance in their heads — you're clearly one of
them. All we need to do is give you some drugs, it will get your chemical balance back to
normal."So I started taking a drug called Paxil or Seroxat, it's the same thing with
different names in different countries. And I felt much better, I got a real boost. But
not very long afterwards, this feeling of pain started to come back. So I was given higher
and higher doses until, for 13 years, I was taking the maximum possible dose that you're
legally allowed to take. And for a lot of those 13 years, and pretty much all the time by
the end, I was still in a lot of pain. And I started asking myself, "What's going on here?
Because you're doing everything you're told to do by the story that's dominating the
culture — why do you still feel like this?"So to get to the bottom of these two mysteries,
for a book that I've written I ended up going on a big journey all over the world, I
traveled over 40,000 miles.

I wanted to sit with the leading experts in the world about what causes depression and
anxiety and crucially, what solves them, and people who have come through depression and
anxiety and out the other side in all sorts of ways. And I learned a huge amount from the
amazing people I got to know along the way. But I think at the heart of what I learned is,
so far, we have scientific evidence for nine different causes of depression and anxiety.
Two of them are indeed in our biology. Your genes can make you more sensitive to these
problems, though they don't write your destiny. And there are real brain changes that can
happen when you become depressed that can make it harder to get out. But most of the
factors that have been proven to cause depression and anxiety are not in our biology. They
are factors in the way we live. And once you understand them, it opens up a very different
set of solutions that should be offered to people alongside the option of chemical
antidepressants. For example, if you're lonely, you're more likely to become
depressed.

If, when you go to work, you don't have any control over your job, you've just got to do
what you're told, you're more likely to become depressed. If you very rarely get out into
the natural world, you're more likely to become depressed. And one thing unites a lot of
the causes of depression and anxiety that I learned about. Not all of them, but a lot of
them. Everyone here knows you've all got natural physical needs, right? Obviously. You
need food, you need water, you need shelter, you need clean air. If I took those things
away from you, you'd all be in real trouble, real fast. But at the same time, every human
being has natural psychological needs. You need to feel you belong. You need to feel your
life has meaning and purpose. You need to feel that people see you and value you. You need
to feel you've got a future that makes sense. And this culture we built is good at lots of
things. And many things are better than in the past — I'm glad to be alive
today.

But we've been getting less and less good at meeting these deep, underlying psychological
needs. And it's not the only thing that's going on, but I think it's the key reason why
this crisis keeps rising and rising. And I found this really hard to absorb. I really
wrestled with the idea of shifting from thinking of my depression as just a problem in my
brain, to one with many causes, including many in the way we're living. And it only really
began to fall into place for me when one day, I went to interview a South African
psychiatrist named Dr. Derek Summerfield. He's a great guy. And Dr. Summerfield happened
to be in Cambodia in 2001, when they first introduced chemical antidepressants for people
in that country. And the local doctors, the Cambodians, had never heard of these drugs, so
they were like, what are they? And he explained. And they said to him, "We don't need
them, we've already got antidepressants." And he was like, "What do you mean?" He thought
they were going to talk about some kind of herbal remedy, like St.

John's Wort, ginkgo biloba, something like that. Instead, they told him a story. There was
a farmer in their community who worked in the rice fields. And one day, he stood on a land
mine left over from the war with the United States, and he got his leg blown off. So they
him an artificial leg, and after a while, he went back to work in the rice fields. But
apparently, it's super painful to work under water when you've got an artificial limb, and
I'm guessing it was pretty traumatic to go back and work in the field where he got blown
up. The guy started to cry all day, he refused to get out of bed, he developed all the
symptoms of classic depression. The Cambodian doctor said, "This is when we gave him an
antidepressant." And Dr. Summerfield said, "What was it?" They explained that they went
and sat with him. They listened to him. They realized that his pain made sense — it was
hard for him to see it in the throes of his depression, but actually, it had perfectly
understandable causes in his life.

One of the doctors, talking to the people in the community, figured, "You know, if we
bought this guy a cow, he could become a dairy farmer, he wouldn't be in this position
that was screwing him up so much, he wouldn't have to go and work in the rice fields." So
they bought him a cow. Within a couple of weeks, his crying stopped, within a month, his
depression was gone. They said to doctor Summerfield, "So you see, doctor, that cow, that
was an antidepressant, that's what you mean, right?"

If you'd been raised to think about depression the way I was, and most of the people here
were, that sounds like a bad joke, right? "I went to my doctor for an antidepressant, she
gave me a cow." But what those Cambodian doctors knew intuitively, based on this
individual, unscientific anecdote, is what the leading medical body in the world, the
World Health Organization, has been trying to tell us for years, based on the best
scientific evidence. If you're depressed, if you're anxious, you're not weak, you're not
crazy, you're not, in the main, a machine with broken parts. You're a human being with
unmet needs. And it's just as important to think here about what those Cambodian doctors
and the World Health Organization are not saying. They did not say to this farmer, "Hey,
buddy, you need to pull yourself together. It's your job to figure out and fix this
problem on your own." On the contrary, what they said is, "We're here as a group to pull
together with you, so together, we can figure out and fix this problem." This is what
every depressed person needs, and it's what every depressed person deserves. This is why
one of the leading doctors at the United Nations, in their official statement for World
Health Day, couple of years back in 2017, said we need to talk less about chemical
imbalances and more about the imbalances in the way we live.

Drugs give real relief to some people — they gave relief to me for a while — but precisely
because this problem goes deeper than their biology, the solutions need to go much deeper,
too. But when I first learned that, I remember thinking, "OK, I could see all the
scientific evidence, I read a huge number of studies, I interviewed a huge number of the
experts who were explaining this," but I kept thinking, "How can we possibly do that?" The
things that are making us depressed are in most cases more complex than what was going on
with this Cambodian farmer. Where do we even begin with that insight? But then, in the long
journey for my book, all over the world, I kept meeting people who were doing exactly
that, from Sydney, to San Francisco, to São Paulo. I kept meeting people who were
understanding the deeper causes of depression and anxiety and, as groups, fixing them.
Obviously, I can't tell you about all the amazing people I got to know and wrote about, or
all of the nine causes of depression and anxiety that I learned about, because they won't
let me give a 10-hour TED Talk — you can complain about that to them. But I want to focus
on two of the causes and two of the solutions that emerge from them, if that's
alright.

Here's the first. We are the loneliest society in human history. There was a recent study
that asked Americans, "Do you feel like you're no longer close to anyone?" And 39 percent
of people said that described them. "No longer close to anyone." In the international
measurements of loneliness, Britain and the rest of Europe are just behind the US, in case
anyone here is feeling smug.

I spent a lot of time discussing this with the leading expert in the world on loneliness,
an incredible man named professor John Cacioppo, who was at Chicago, and I thought a lot
about one question his work poses to us. Professor Cacioppo asked, "Why do we exist? Why
are we here, why are we alive?" One key reason is that our ancestors on the savannas of
Africa were really good at one thing. They weren't bigger than the animals they took down
a lot of the time, they weren't faster than the animals they took down a lot of the time,
but they were much better at banding together into groups and cooperating. This was our
superpower as a species — we band together, just like bees evolved to live in a hive,
humans evolved to live in a tribe. And we are the first humans ever to disband our tribes.
And it is making us feel awful. But it doesn't have to be this way. One of the heroes in my
book, and in fact, in my life, is a doctor named Sam Everington.

He's a general practitioner in a poor part of East London, where I lived for many years.
And Sam was really uncomfortable, because he had loads of patients coming to him with
terrible depression and anxiety. And like me, he's not opposed to chemical
antidepressants, he thinks they give some relief to some people. But he could see two
things. Firstly, his patients were depressed and anxious a lot of the time for totally
understandable reasons, like loneliness. And secondly, although the drugs were giving some
relief to some people, for many people, they didn't solve the problem. The underlying
problem. One day, Sam decided to pioneer a different approach. A woman came to his center,
his medical center, called Lisa Cunningham. I got to know Lisa later. And Lisa had been
shut away in her home with crippling depression and anxiety for seven years. And when she
came to Sam's center, she was told, "Don't worry, we'll carry on giving you these drugs,
but we're also going to prescribe something else.

We're going to prescribe for you to come here to this center twice a week to meet with a
group of other depressed and anxious people, not to talk about how miserable you are, but
to figure out something meaningful you can all do together so you won't be lonely and you
won't feel like life is pointless."The first time this group met, Lisa literally started
vomiting with anxiety, it was so overwhelming for her. But people rubbed her back, the
group started talking, they were like, "What could we do?" These are inner-city, East
London people like me, they didn't know anything about gardening. They were like, "Why
don't we learn gardening?" There was an area behind the doctors' offices that was just
scrubland. "Why don't we make this into a garden?" They started to take books out of the
library, started to watch YouTube clips. They started to get their fingers in the soil.
They started to learn the rhythms of the seasons.

There's a lot of evidence that exposure to the natural world is a really powerful
antidepressant. But they started to do something even more important. They started to form
a tribe. They started to form a group. They started to care about each other. If one of
them didn't show up, the others would go looking for them — "Are you OK?" Help them figure
out what was troubling them that day. The way Lisa put it to me, "As the garden began to
bloom, we began to bloom."This approach is called social prescribing, it's spreading all
over Europe. And there's a small, but growing body of evidence suggesting it can produce
real and meaningful falls in depression and anxiety. And one day, I remember standing in
the garden that Lisa and her once-depressed friends had built — it's a really beautiful
garden — and having this thought, it's very much inspired by a guy called professor Hugh
Mackay in Australia.

I was thinking, so often when people feel down in this culture, what we say to them — I'm
sure everyone here said it, I have — we say, "You just need to be you, be yourself." And
I've realized, actually, what we should say to people is, "Don't be you. Don't be
yourself. Be us, be we. Be part of a group."

The solution to these problems does not lie in drawing more and more on your resources as
an isolated individual — that's partly what got us in this crisis. It lies on reconnecting
with something bigger than you. And that really connects to one of the other causes of
depression and anxiety that I wanted to talk to you about. So everyone knows junk food has
taken over our diets and made us physically sick. I don't say that with any sense of
superiority, I literally came to give this talk from McDonald's. I saw all of you eating
that healthy TED breakfast, I was like no way. But just like junk food has taken over our
diets and made us physically sick, a kind of junk values have taken over our minds and
made us mentally sick. For thousands of years, philosophers have said, if you think life
is about money, and status and showing off, you're going to feel like crap. That's not an
exact quote from Schopenhauer, but that is the gist of what he said. But weirdly, hardy
anyone had scientifically investigated this, until a truly extraordinary person I got to
know, named professor Tim Kasser, who's at Knox College in Illinois, and he's been
researching this for about 30 years now.

And his research suggests several really important things. Firstly, the more you believe
you can buy and display your way out of sadness, and into a good life, the more likely you
are to become depressed and anxious. And secondly, as a society, we have become much more
driven by these beliefs. All throughout my lifetime, under the weight of advertising and
Instagram and everything like them. And as I thought about this, I realized it's like we've
all been fed since birth, a kind of KFC for the soul. We've been trained to look for
happiness in all the wrong places, and just like junk food doesn't meet your nutritional
needs and actually makes you feel terrible, junk values don't meet your psychological
needs, and they take you away from a good life. But when I first spent time with professor
Kasser and I was learning all this, I felt a really weird mixture of emotions. Because on
the one hand, I found this really challenging.

I could see how often in my own life, when I felt down, I tried to remedy it with some
kind of show-offy, grand external solution. And I could see why that did not work well for
me. I also thought, isn't this kind of obvious? Isn't this almost like banal, right? If I
said to everyone here, none of you are going to lie on your deathbed and think about all
the shoes you bought and all the retweets you got, you're going to think about moments of
love, meaning and connection in your life. I think that seems almost like a cliché. But I
kept talking to professor Kasser and saying, "Why am I feeling this strange doubleness?"
And he said, "At some level, we all know these things. But in this culture, we don't live
by them." We know them so well they've become clichés, but we don't live by them. I kept
asking why, why would we know something so profound, but not live by it? And after a
while, professor Kasser said to me, "Because we live in a machine that is designed to get
us to neglect what is important about life." I had to really think about
that.

"Because we live in a machine that is designed to get us to neglect what is important
about life."And professor Kasser wanted to figure out if we can disrupt that machine. He's
done loads of research into this; I'll tell you about one example, and I really urge
everyone here to try this with their friends and family. With a guy called Nathan Dungan,
he got a group of teenagers and adults to come together for a series of sessions over a
period of time, to meet up. And part of the point of the group was to get people to think
about a moment in their life they had actually found meaning and purpose. For different
people, it was different things. For some people, it was playing music, writing, helping
someone — I'm sure everyone here can picture something, right? And part of the point of
the group was to get people to ask, "OK, how could you dedicate more of your life to
pursuing these moments of meaning and purpose, and less to, I don't know, buying crap you
don't need, putting it on social media and trying to get people to go, 'OMG, so
jealous!'"And what they found was, just having these meetings, it was like a kind of
Alcoholics Anonymous for consumerism, right?

Getting people to have these meetings, articulate these values, determine to act on them
and check in with each other, led to a marked shift in people's values. It took them away
from this hurricane of depression-generating messages training us to seek happiness in the
wrong places, and towards more meaningful and nourishing values that lift us out of
depression. But with all the solutions that I saw and have written about, and many I can't
talk about here, I kept thinking, you know: Why did it take me so long to see these
insights? Because when you explain them to people — some of them are more complicated, but
not all — when you explain this to people, it's not like rocket science, right? At some
level, we already know these things. Why do we find it so hard to understand? I think
there's many reasons. But I think one reason is that we have to change our understanding
of what depression and anxiety actually are. There are very real biological contributions
to depression and anxiety.

But if we allow the biology to become the whole picture, as I did for so long, as I would
argue our culture has done pretty much most of my life, what we're implicitly saying to
people is, and this isn't anyone's intention, but what we're implicitly saying to people
is, "Your pain doesn't mean anything. It's just a malfunction. It's like a glitch in a
computer program, it's just a wiring problem in your head." But I was only able to start
changing my life when I realized your depression is not a malfunction. It's a signal. Your
depression is a signal. It's telling you something.

We feel this way for reasons, and they can be hard to see in the throes of depression — I
understand that really well from personal experience. But with the right help, we can
understand these problems and we can fix these problems together. But to do that, the very
first step is we have to stop insulting these signals by saying they're a sign of
weakness, or madness or purely biological, except for a tiny number of people. We need to
start listening to these signals, because they're telling us something we really need to
hear. It's only when we truly listen to these signals, and we honor these signals and
respect these signals, that we're going to begin to see the liberating, nourishing, deeper
solutions. The cows that are waiting all around us. Thank you.

<!--
ad_duration=3.33
comment_count=79
event="TEDSummit 2019"
external_start_time=0
has_talk_citation=1
intro_duration=11.82
is_subtitle_required="False"
is_talk_featured="True"
language="en"
language_swap="False"
native_language="en"
number_of_related_talks=6
number_of_speakers=1
number_of_subtitled_videos=24
number_of_tags=8
number_of_talk_download_languages=25
number_of_talk_more_resources=2
number_of_talk_recommendations=0
number_of_talks_take_actions=0
post_ad_duration=0.83
published_timestamp="2019-09-18 14:52:31"
recording_date="2019-07-20"
speaker_description="Journalist"
speaker_is_published=1
speaker_name="Johann Hari"
talk_name="This could be why you're depressed or anxious"
talks_tags=["depression","mental-health","illness","society","personal-growth","brain","humanity","relationships"]
talks_take_action=[]
url_audio="https://download.ted.com/talks/JohannHari_2019T.mp3?apikey=acme-roadrunner"
url_photo_speaker="https://pe.tedcdn.com/images/ted/4d5aed8474db2ab633a75a8febec6fcb38d26098_254x191.jpg"
url_photo_talk="https://s3.amazonaws.com/talkstar-photos/uploads/7e760eef-98ca-4846-a82d-b5a321f8af1d/JohannHari_2019T-embed.jpg"
url_webpage="https://www.ted.com/talks/johann_hari_this_could_be_why_you_re_depressed_or_anxious"
video_type_name="TED Stage Talk"
-->