---
title: Revelations from a lifetime of dance
speaker: Judith Jamison and members of the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater
description: >-
 "Dance can elevate our human experience beyond words," says Judith Jamison,
 artistic director emerita of the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater. In between
 performances of excerpts from Alvin Ailey's classic works "Revelations" and
 "Cry," Jamison reflects on the enduring power of dance to transform history into
 art that thrills audiences around the world. (Performances by Solomon Dumas,
 Samantha Figgins and Constance Stamatiou)
date: 2019-04-15
tags: ["dance","performance","performance-art","art","entertainment"]
slug: judith_jamison_and_members_of_the_alvin_ailey_american_dance_theater_revelations_from_a_lifetime_of_dance
---

(Music: "Wade in the Water" by Ella Jenkins)Wade in the waterWade in the water,
childrenWade in the waterGod's a-gonna trouble the waterOh, why don't you wade in the
waterWade in the water, childrenWade in the waterGod's a-gonna trouble the waterSee that
man all dressed in whiteGod's a-gonna trouble the waterHe looks like a man of the
IsraeliteGod's a-gonna trouble the waterWade in the waterWade in the water, childrenWade
in the waterGod's a-gonna trouble the waterSee that man all dressed in redGod's a-gonna
trouble the waterIt looks like the man that Moses ledGod's a-gonna trouble the waterWade
in the waterWade in the water, childrenWade in the waterGod's a-gonna trouble the
waterDidn't my Lord deliver Daniel Daniel, DanielDidn't my Lord deliver DanielThen why not
every man? Didn't my Lord deliver Daniel Daniel, DanielDidn't my Lord deliver DanielWhy not
every man? Man went down to the riverMan went down to the riverMan went down to the
riverWent down there for to prayMan went down to the riverMan went down to the riverMan
went down to the riverTo wash his sins awayHe washed all day, he washed all nightHe washed
till his hands were soreHe washed all day, he washed all nightTill he couldn't wash a-no
moreMan went down to the riverMan went down to the riverMan went down to the river(Music
fades)

(Juliet Blake) And now, let's give a warm welcome to the artistic director emerita of the
Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater, Judith Jamison.

Judith Jamison: Thanks. How are y'all?(Audience cheers)JJ: Yeah, you know you've just been
to church?

You just saw a baptism, yes? This is from this wonderful piece Mr. Ailey created in 1960,
called "Revelations." Mr. Ailey was 29 years old when he choreographed this masterpiece.
It's been danced all over the world and understood universally, because he understood the
humanity in us all. "Revelations" is a reflection of a journey we all take in life, and,
hopefully, triumphantly. That was the magic of Alvin Ailey. He was able to see you, in the
audience, see me, as the dancer, and see the connection between us, and choreographed
works that connected us all. So you felt he was telling your story, while I felt I was
dancing mine. I started dancing when I was six years old in Philadelphia. I was skinny
...

Dark chocolate, and a kid with legs up to my armpits. And the very first performance I
had, at the Judimar School of Dance, was in a red checkered shirt, dungarees, pink ballet
shoes, and we were dancing to "I'm an Old Cowhand from the Rio Grande." I loved every
minute of it. I mean, I literally did love every minute of it, especially when I heard the
applause, and I knew right there, when I was six, I said, "That's for me."

At six, you're not thinking that's going to be a career of your lifetime, but that was
perfect for that moment. I danced my way through school, and through college, and it still
didn't dawn on me that that's what I actually wanted to do. I went to an audition, which I
was dreadful in — it's the only audition I've had in my life — and when I was let go from
that audition — because I thought when they were saying, "Thank you very much," that meant
for me to stay.

I ran up the steps, and there was a man sitting on the steps. And I barely noticed him. He
was an observer. Three days later, that man called me and asked me, would I like to join
the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater. That's how it happened, folks, that's it. There's
no drama or trauma.

So I spent 15 years dancing with the company, and then I directed it for something like 21
years. If you were black and African American and a dancer, any time between the '40s and
the '70s, you had much to say, because your complete voice was not being heard. And you
were not being represented as you truly were. Alvin Ailey had the courage, right in the
middle of the Civil Rights Movement, to present the truth about who we were — that our
creativity, our beauty, our intelligence, our talents were an intrinsic part of the
panoply of American culture. Our mantra has always been to educate, to entertain, and to
lift our audiences. Mr. Ailey believed that dance came from the people and needed to be
delivered back to the people. We didn't dance in a vacuum. It was our mission to serve
people. We call it outreach now, but it's always been a part of who we were and still are,
60 years later, to this day.

Being inclusive of our audiences — it's always been an important part of the company. We
ask ourselves, who are we dancing for? Why are we dancing, if not to show people what it
is to be human and to connect with the audiences that we dance for. We've always felt
responsible to make sure the community understood that what we do is a part of their
heritage. We just don't do this, also, in America, we do it all over the world. We tour
more than any other dance company in the world. After Nelson Mandela was released from
prison, I thought, well, this is the time to go to South Africa. And that was some
outreach. We went to Johannesburg, Soweto, and some other townships that were really in
dire straits. And it dawned on me, as we were there, I'm going like, "Here we are in the
seat of Mother Africa, and we're trying to teach these people how to dance?"

But it was our African Americanness that they were interested in, and the culture that we
had developed over the last 400 years. We toured all over the world many times, and
whether we're in Europe or South America or Asia or somewhere else, audiences are thrilled
and excited. You sounded thrilled and excited. Sometimes with tears in their eyes, because
this nonverbal communication really works. And it's about embracing everyone. Alvin didn't
need to explain to us what was going on at the time in the '60s and the '70s; it was
obvious why were doing his work. He knew what the truth of the time was about, and he was
unafraid to reveal it through dance. He tapped into every emotion he had and we had, and
from angerness to happiness, to grief and everything in between, he knew us. He took our
history and turned it into powerful dance. He and I overlapped generationally. We didn't
have to talk about things so much, because we understood implicitly our shared
responsibilities.

So when he asked me to take over the company before he passed in 1989, I felt prepared to
carry it forward. Alvin and I were like parts of the same tree. He, the roots and the
trunk, and we were the branches. I was his muse. We were all his muses. The ballet "Cry,"
which some of you might have seen — you're going to see an excerpt of it — it was made on
me, and Alvin dedicated it to all black women, especially our mothers. When Alvin and I
went in the studio, of course he wasn't thinking, "Here I am, creating an iconic work." Do
you know any artist that does that? You don't go into the studio to create anything but
what's coming truthfully from your heart and your spirit. And you trust that you have a
dancer you can share that with. Rehearsal space is a sacred space, not to be intruded
upon, because it's about talking to each other through spirit. You better have some
technique on top of that so you can do the dance.

He brought his Alvin to "Cry" and I brought my Judy to it. I just did the steps. And this
was a birthday present for his mother, because he couldn't afford to get her a tactile
gift. When I performed it the first time, it was physically and emotionally draining. I
hadn't yet run through the whole piece from beginning to end. The ballet is 16 minutes
long. It's about a proud woman who has been to hell and back, from her journey across the
Atlantic. She's exhausted, she's a queen, and in this section, you're going to see she is
triumphant. She made it, and she is, in that last step that she does, beating away
anything negative with her tremendous strength. And in the last step, she digs into the
earth and she reaches into the sky ... because she's clearing space for the next journey.
I performed it in 1971, and we are still clearing space. Now let me leave you with one last
thought. Here we are, in the 21st century, still fighting for civil rights.

Not a day goes by that we are not made aware of the struggle that continues. I believe
that dance can elevate our human experience beyond words. And when you're sitting in the
dark, in the theater, having a personal experience, you don't feel blocked or
misunderstood. You feel open, alive, and, we hope, inspired. Thank you.

(Music: "Right on. Be free." by East Harlem)I wanna go where the north wind blowsI wanna
know what the falcon knowsI wanna go where the wild goose goesHigh flyin' bird, high
flyin' bird, fly onI want the clouds over my headI don't want no store bought bedI'm gonna
live until I'm deadMother, mother, mother Save your childRight on, be freeRight on, be
freeRight on, be freeI don't want no store bought bedRight onI want the clouds over my
headBe freeAin't no time to be afraidMother, mother, mother Save your child

I don't want no store bought bedRight onI want the clouds over my headBe freeAin't no time
to be afraidMother save your childI wanna see a rainbow in the skyI wanna watch the clouds
go byIt might make my load a little lightLord, Lord, Lord Where will I be tomorrow
night? Right onBe freeRight on, be freeRight on, be freeRight on, be freeRight on, be
freeRight on, be freeRight on, be free(Music fades)

<!--
ad_duration=3.33
comment_count=3
event="TED2019"
external_start_time=0
has_talk_citation=0
intro_duration=11.82
is_subtitle_required="False"
is_talk_featured="True"
language="en"
language_swap="False"
native_language="en"
number_of_related_talks=6
number_of_speakers=2
number_of_subtitled_videos=12
number_of_tags=5
number_of_talk_download_languages=12
number_of_talk_more_resources=0
number_of_talk_recommendations=3
number_of_talks_take_actions=2
post_ad_duration=0.83
published_timestamp="2019-10-11 14:59:29"
recording_date="2019-04-15"
speaker_description="Dancer, choreographer"
speaker_is_published=1
speaker_name="Judith Jamison and members of the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater"
talk_more_resources=[]
talk_name="Revelations from a lifetime of dance"
talk_recommendations_blurb="More resources curated by Judith Jamison"
talks_tags=["dance","performance","performance-art","art","entertainment"]
url_photo_speaker="https://pe.tedcdn.com/images/ted/d3fbcac81861fb58d3687c9f24bdb7ff415ee5a8_254x191.jpg"
url_photo_talk="https://s3.amazonaws.com/talkstar-photos/uploads/e73ca68a-fce5-47de-9ccc-fd6371f81030/JudithJamison_2019-embed.jpg"
video_type_name="TED Stage Talk"
-->