---
title: How a new species of ancestors is changing our theory of human evolution
speaker: Juliet Brophy
description: >-
 In 2013, a treasure trove of unusual fossils were uncovered in a cave in South
 Africa, and researchers soon realized: these were the remains of a new species of
 ancient humans. Paleoanthropologist Juliet Brophy takes us inside the discovery
 of Homo naledi, explaining how this mysterious ancestor is forcing us to rethink
 where we come from -- and what it means to be human.
date: 2018-03-03
tags: ["anthropology","human-origins","human-body","humanity","science","paleontology","technology","evolution","biology","brain","history","tedx"]
slug: juliet_brophy_how_a_new_species_of_ancestors_is_changing_our_theory_of_human_evolution
---

Human origins. Who are we? Where do we come from, and how do we know? In my field,
paleoanthropology, we explore human origins — the "who" and "where" questions — by
analyzing fossils that date back thousands and even millions of years. In 2015, a team of
colleagues and I named a new species in the genus Homo — our genus — Homo naledi. Let's
take a step back and put that into context. The last common ancestors between humans and
chimps date somewhere between six and eight million years. The earliest hominins, or
earliest human ancestors, evolved into a group known as the australopithecines. The
australopithecines evolved into the genus Homo and eventually modern humans — us. With each
new fossil discovery, we get a little bit closer to better understanding who we are and
where we came from. With these new fossil finds, we realize we now have to make changes to
this tree. Until this discovery, we thought we had a pretty good idea about the patterns
of evolutionary change.

Current fossil evidence suggests that the earliest populations of the genus Homo evolved
in Africa somewhere between two and three million years. Fast-forward to approximately
300,000 years to where we see the origins of the first modern humans. While the fossil
record between these time frames in Africa is relatively sparse, the fossils nonetheless
demonstrated certain trends from our earliest ancestors to modern humans. For example, our
brains were becoming larger relative the rest of our body. Our pelves were becoming more
bowl-shaped, and our hand-wrist morphology, or form, suggested a change in our grip as we
began to make and use stone tools and spend less time in the trees. These new fossils
disrupt everything we thought we knew about these trends and force us to change the way
that we think about human evolution. South Africa in general, but the Cradle of Humankind
in particular, contains numerous sites where hundreds of thousands of fossils have been
found.

As an undergraduate student, I fell in love with one of them ... Mrs. Ples. The skull of a
2.1-million-year-old early human ancestor. From that point on, I was determined to go to
South Africa and study human evolution. I first traveled there in 2003, and I did get to
see my beloved Mrs. Ples.

But words can hardly convey my excitement when I was chosen as an early career scientist
by Lee Berger, a world-renowned paleoanthropologist, to be one of the primary analysts of
recently excavated unpublished fossils. This treasure trove of fossils was being recovered
from a new site called the Dinaledi Chamber in the Rising Star cave system. Species are
often named based on a skull, a lower jaw, or, very rarely, a handful of postcranial, or
below-the-neck, elements. The fossils from Dinaledi were another story altogether. An
unprecedented approximately 1800 specimens — so far — have been excavated from the Rising
Star system, representing at least 15 individual skeletons. The research team that I was
invited to join was tasked with describing, comparing and analyzing the fossils, with the
difficult goal of identifying to what species the fossils belonged. We were divided up
into our different areas of expertise. We were divided up in different areas of the lab,
too.

So there was "Hand Land," for the fossil hand people, "Hip Heaven" for the pelvis ... I
was in the "Tooth Booth."

And after long, intense days in the lab, the different teams would meet up at night and
discuss our findings, still consumed by questions from our analyses. It was incredible how
different the interpretations were. Each body part seemed to come from a different
species, based on what we knew from the fossil record. The suite of characteristics we
were seeing didn't match any known species. And if we had only recovered the skull, we
might have called it one thing; if we had only recovered the pelvis, we might have called
it another. The anatomy of the skeletons didn't make sense with the framework of what we
thought we knew of human evolution. Did it belong in the genus Homo? Should it be an
australopithecine? Those bipedal, more apelike ancestors? Or perhaps it should be its own
species. Ultimately, after much deliberation, we decided the Rising Star specimens did
indeed warrant a new species, which we called "Homo naledi." From the head to the feet,
the fossils present a mosaic of primitive, or ancestral, and derived or more modern-like
features.

The skull is quite derived, appearing most similar to early representatives of the genus
Homo, like Homo habilis and Homo erectus. However, the brain is scarcely half the size of
a modern human one. One that is smaller than any other early Homo that has ever been
found. As someone who studies teeth, I might argue these are the coolest fossils found at
the site.

The assemblage consists of 190 whole or fragmentary teeth that range in age from very old
to very young. Like the skeletons, the teeth present a mix of primitive and derived
traits. In modern humans, the third molar is typically the smallest, while the first molar
is the biggest, but Homo naledi has the primitive condition where the third molar is the
biggest and the first molar is the smallest. The anterior teeth, or the incisors and
canines, are small for the genus Homo, and the lower canine has a cuspulid on it — an
extra cuspule that gives it a distinct mitten-like shape that it shares with some
specimens of the early human, Homo erectus. The overall shape of the teeth looked odd to
me, so I performed crown-shape analysis on the occlusal surfaces of deciduous teeth, or
baby teeth — on your left — and the permanent premolars and molars on your right. The
deciduous teeth are especially narrow, and the premolars are unique in their outline shape
compared to other hominids. In fact, when I compare the outlines, when I lay them on top of
each other, they look very similar.

We say they have "low intraspecific variations," so the variation within the species is
low. When I compare this to groups like the australopithecines, the intraspecific
variation is much larger. Postcranially, the team concluded that the position of the
shoulders suggesting naledi was a climber; the flared pelvis and curved fingers are all
primitive for the genus Homo. On the other hand, the humanlike wrist, long slender legs
and modern feet are all consistent with other members of the genus. In 2017, we announced
more specimens of Homo naledi from the nearby Lesedi Chamber, also in the Rising Star cave
system. In addition, our geology team managed to produce an age estimate. The date's a big
deal because, up until now, we had based our analysis solely on the morphology of the
specimens, without previous knowledge of how old something is — something which could
unconsciously bias our interpretations.

With its small brain and flared pelvis, we would not have been surprised if the fossils
turned out to be two million years old. Instead, the fossils dated to 235 to 336 thousand
years, an incredibly young date for such a small-brained individual. So think back to what
I said earlier: we thought that our brains were becoming larger relative to the rest of
our body. Now we have a small-brained, young individual complicating this idea. What does
all this mean? Homo naledi has taught us that we need to reassess what it means to be in
the genus Homo. We need to rethink what it means to be human. In fact, most of the
characteristics that we use to define the genus Homo, such as brain size and hip
morphology, are no longer valid. No other species exists with this mix of primitive and
derived traits. Why is there so much morphological variation in the genus Homo? And what
force is driving that variation? Another implication for these fossils is that for the
first time, we have concrete evidence of a species coexisting in Africa, at 300,000 years,
with modern humans.

Until this discovery, we only had large-brained modern humans that existed in Africa. Did
they interbreed with each other? Did they compete with each other? Another implication that
these fossils have is for the archaeologists studying stone tools in South Africa. Keep in
mind that neither the Dinaledi nor the Lesedi Chambers have any artifacts in them.
However, they do overlap in time with several stone-tool industries, the makers of which
are considered to be either modern humans or direct human ancestors. This begs the
question: Who made the stone tools of South Africa? Brain size has historically played a
key role in identifying a species as a tool user. The idea is that you need to have a
large brain to have even the capacity to make stone tools. But that notion has been
questioned. Furthermore, Homo naledi, even with its small brain size, has a hand-wrist
morphology similar to other species that did make and use stone tools, suggesting it had
the capability.

With two species coexisting in Africa at 300,000 years, we can no longer assume we know
the maker of tools at sites with no associated species. So where does Homo naledi fit in
our human evolutionary lineage? Who is it most closely related to? Who did it evolve from?
We're still trying to figure all that out. It's ironic, because paleoanthropologists are
renowned for having small sample sizes. We now have a large sample size, and more
questions than answers. Homo naledi has taught us, has brought us a little bit closer to
better understanding our evolutionary past. So while Mrs. Ples will always hold a special
place in my heart, she now shares that space with several thousand others.

Thank you.

<!--
ad_duration=3.33
comment_count=48
event="TEDxLSU"
external_start_time=0
has_talk_citation=1
intro_duration=11.82
is_subtitle_required="False"
is_talk_featured="True"
language="en"
language_swap="False"
native_language="en"
number_of_related_talks=6
number_of_speakers=1
number_of_subtitled_videos=17
number_of_tags=12
number_of_talk_download_languages=17
number_of_talk_more_resources=0
number_of_talk_recommendations=1
number_of_talks_take_actions=0
post_ad_duration=0.83
published_timestamp="2019-03-01 16:01:58"
recording_date="2018-03-03"
speaker_description="Paleoanthropologist"
speaker_is_published=1
speaker_name="Juliet Brophy"
talk_more_resources=[]
talk_name="How a new species of ancestors is changing our theory of human evolution"
talk_recommendations_blurb="More resources curated by Juliet Brophy"
talks_tags=["anthropology","human-origins","human-body","humanity","science","paleontology","technology","evolution","biology","brain","history","tedx"]
talks_take_action=[]
url_audio="https://download.ted.com/talks/JulietBrophy_2018X.mp3?apikey=acme-roadrunner"
url_photo_speaker="https://pe.tedcdn.com/images/ted/9ce546e4797d766d945dd38360514e86a13203a3_254x191.jpg"
url_photo_talk="https://s3.amazonaws.com/talkstar-photos/uploads/2072a36f-9e28-46a2-aa4b-b9a96b20ab25/JulietBrophy_2017X-embed.jpg"
url_webpage="https://www.ted.com/talks/juliet_brophy_how_a_new_species_of_ancestors_is_changing_our_theory_of_human_evolution"
video_type_name="TEDx Talk"
-->