---
title: How tech companies can help combat the pandemic and reshape public health
speaker: Karen DeSalvo
description: >-
 Karen DeSalvo, the chief health officer at Google, explains the partnership
 between big tech and public health in slowing the spread of COVID-19 -- and
 discusses a new contact tracing technology recently rolled out by Google and
 Apple that aims to ease the burden on health workers and provide scientists
 critical time to create a vaccine. (This virtual conversation, hosted by current
 affairs curator Whitney Pennington Rodgers and head of TED Chris Anderson, was
 recorded on May 27, 2020.)
date: 2020-05-18
tags: ["public-health","coronavirus","technology","pandemic","google","health","health-care"]
slug: karen_desalvo_how_tech_companies_can_help_combat_the_pandemic_and_reshape_public_health
---

Whitney Pennington Rodgers: Before we really dive in to talking specifically about
Google's work in the contact tracing space, let's first set up the relationship between
public health and tech. You know, I think a lot of people, they hear "Google," and they
think of this big tech company. They think of a search engine. And there may be questions
about why does Google have a chief health officer? So could you talk a little bit about
your work and the work your team does? Karen DeSalvo: Yeah. Well, maybe I'm the embodiment
of public health and tech coming together. My background is, I practiced medicine for 20
years, though a part of my work has always been in public health. In fact, my first job,
putting myself through college, was working at the state laboratory in Massachusetts. As
the story will go with Joia [Mukherjee] we're reconnected again, a Massachusetts theme.
And I, across the journey of the work that I was doing for my patients to provide them
information and the right care and meet them where they were medically, translated into
the work that I did when I was the Health Commissioner in New Orleans and later when I had
other roles in public health practice, that really is about thinking of people and
community in the context in which they live and how we provide the best information, the
best resources, the best services that are culturally and linguistically appropriate, meet
them where they are.

And when the opportunity arose to join the team at Google, I was really thrilled, because
one of the things that I have learned across my journey is that having the right
information at the right time can make all the difference in the world. It can literally
save lives. And billions of people come to Google every day asking for information, and so
it is a tremendous opportunity to have that right information and those resources to
people so that they can make good choices, so that they can have the right information, so
that they can participate in their own health, but also, in the context of this historic
pandemic, be a part of the broader health of the community, whether it's to flatten the
curve or keep the curve flat as we go forward. WPR: And so it sounds like that there is
this connection, then, between public health and what Google's work is in thinking about
public education and providing information.

And so could you talk a little bit about that link between public health and public
education and Google? KD: Definitely. You know, the essential public health services
include communication and data, and these are two areas where tech in general, but
certainly Google, has an opportunity to partner with the public health system and with the
public for their health more broadly. You know, going back to the earlier days of this
pandemic, towards the end of January, Google first leaned in to start to put information
out to the public about how to find resources in their local community, from the CDC or
from other authoritative resources. So on the search page, we put up "knowledge panels,"
is the way that we describe it, and we did develop an SOS alert, which is something we've
done for other crises, and in this particular historic crisis, we wanted to be certain
that when people went on to search, that there was authoritative information, which is
always there but certainly very prominently displayed, and do that in partnership with
public health authorities.

So we began our journey really very much in an information way of making certain that
people knew how to get the right information at the right time to save lives. I think the
journey for us over the course of the last few months has been to continue to lean in on
how we provide information in partnership with public health authorities in local areas,
directing people in a certain state to their state's health department, helping people get
information about testing. There's also been, though, a suite of resources that we wanted
to provide to the health care community, whether that was for health care providers that
may not have access to PPE, for example, we did a partnership with the CDC Foundation.
Though the scale of the company and the opportunity for us to partner with public health
around things like helping public health understand if their blunt policies around social
distancing to flatten the curve were actually having an impact on behavior in the
community.

That's our community mobility reports. We were asked by public health agencies all across
the world, including some of my colleagues here in the US, could we help them have a
better evidence-based way to understand the policies around social distancing or shelter
in place? Which I think we'll talk about more later. In addition to that sort of work,
also been working to support public health in this really essential work they're doing for
contact tracing, which is very human-resource intensive, very complex, incredibly
important to keep the curve flat and prevent future outbreaks, and give time and space for
health care and, importantly, science to do the work they need to do to create treatments
and, very importantly, a vaccine. So that work around providing an additional set of
digital tools, exposure notification for the contact tracing community, is one of the
other areas where we've been supporting the public health. So we think, as we've thought
about this pandemic, it's support the users, which is the consumer.

There's also a health care system and a scientific community where we've been partnering.
And then, of course, public health. And for me, I mean, Whitney, this is just a wonderful
opportunity for Big Tech to come together with the public health infrastructure. Public
health, as Joia was sort of articulating before, is often an unsung hero. It saves your
life every day, but you didn't know it. And it is also a pretty under-resourced part of
our health infrastructure, globally, but especially in the US. It's something I worked on
a lot before I came to Google. And so the opportunity to partner and do everything that we
can as a company and, in this case, with contact tracing in partnership with Apple to
create a very privacy-promoting, useful, helpful product that is going to be a part of the
bigger contact tracing is something that we feel really proud of and look forward to
continuing to work with public health.

In fact, we were on the phone this morning with a suite of public health groups from
across the country, listening again to what would be helpful questions that they have. And
as we think about rolling out the system, this is the way that we've been for the last
many months at Google, and I'm just really ...I landed at a place just a few months ago —
I just started at Google — where we can have an impact on what people know all across the
world. And I'll tell you, as a public health professional and as a doc, that is one of the
most critical things. People need to have the right information so they can help navigate
their health journey, but also especially in this pandemic because it's going to save
lives. WPR: That's great. Thank you. So, to talk more about this contact tracing system and
the exposure notification app, we've read so much about this. Could you describe this, a
little bit about how the app works, what exactly are users seeing, what information is
being collected?

Just give us sort of a broad sense of what this app does. KD: Yeah. Let me just start by
explaining what it is, and it's actually not even an app, it's just an API. It's a system
that allows a public health agency to create an app, and only the API, this doorway to the
phone system, is available to public health. So it's not designed for any other purpose
than to support public health and the work that they're doing in COVID-19 in contact
tracing. The second piece of this is that we wanted to build a system that was
privacy-promoting, that really put the user first, gave them the opportunity to opt into
the system and opt out whenever they wanted to do that, so they also have some control
over how they're engaging and using their phone, basically, as a part of keeping the curve
flat around the world. The system was developed in response to requests that we were
getting about how could technology, particularly smartphones, be useful in contact
tracing?

And as we thought this through and talked with public health experts and academics and
privacy experts, it was pretty clear that obviously contract tracing is a complex endeavor
that does require human resources, because there's a lot of very particular things that
you need to do in having conversations with people as part of contact tracing. On the other
hand, there's some opportunity to better inform the contact investigators with things
like, particularly, an exposure log. So one of the things that happens when the contact
tracer calls you or visits you is they ask, "Hey, in the last certain number of days," and
in the case of COVID, it would be a couple days before symptoms developed, "Hey, tell us
the story of what you've been involved in doing so that we can begin to think through
where you might have been, to the grocery or to church or what other activities and with
whom you might have been into contact." There's some amount of recall bias in that for all
us, like we forget where we might have been, and there's also an amount of anonymous
contact.

So there are times when we're out in the world, on a bus or in a store, and we may have
come into prolonged and close contact with someone and wouldn't know who they were. And so
the augmentation that the exposure notification system provides is designed to fill in
those gaps and to expedite the notification to public health of who has a positive test,
because the person would have notified, they trigger something that notifies public
health, and then to fill in some of those gaps in the prior exposure. What it does not do
is it does not use GPS or location to track people. So the system actually uses something
different called Bluetooth Low Energy, which is privacy-preserving, it doesn't drain the
battery and it makes it more also interoperable between both Apple and the Android system
so it's more useful, not only in the US context, but globally. So we built this system in
response to some requests to help augment the contact-tracing systems.

We wanted to do it in a way that was user-controlled and privacy-preserving and had
technological features that would allow public health to augment the exposure log in a way
that would accelerate the work that they needed to get done to interrupt transmission —
keep the R naught less than one — and do that in a way that we would also be able to
partner with public health to think about risk scoring. We could talk more about any of
these areas that you want, but I think maybe one of the most important things that I want
to say, Whitney, is how grateful Apple and Google are — I'll take a moment to speak for my
colleagues at Apple — to the great partnership from public health across the world and to
academics and to others who have helped us think through how this can be, how the exposure
notification system fits into the broader contact tracing portfolio, and how it does it in
a way that really respects and protects privacy and also is useful to public
health.

We're still on this journey with them, and I really believe that we're going to be able to
help, and I'm looking forward to being a part of the great work that public health's got
to do on the front lines every day, been doing, frankly, but needs to be able to step
up. WPR: That's great, and thank you for that really detailed explanation. And you know, we
actually have Chris here with some questions from our community, so why don't we turn
there really quickly. Chris Anderson: Yep. Questions pouring in, Karen. Here's one from
Vishal Gurbuxani. Uh ... Gurbu — I've pronounced that horribly wrong, but make up your own
mind. Vishal, we'll connect later and you can tell me how to say that. KD: Fabulous last
name. I love that. That's a Scrabble word. CA: "Given where we are today, how should
employees think about returning to work, with so many conflicting messages?"KD: This has
been an important part of my work for the last few months. I joined Google in December,
and all this started happening.

The pandemic in the world first began in November but it got very hot in many parts of the
world in the last few months, and we've been thinking a lot about how to protect Googlers
but also protect the community. I've been talking a lot about what we've done externally.
You know, internally, Google made a decision to go to work-from-home pretty early. We
believed that we could. We believed that in all the places across the world where we have
offices, that the more we could not only model but frankly just be a part of flattening
the curve, that we would be good citizens. So we have been fairly ... I don't know if the
right word is conservative or assertive, about it, because we really wanted to make sure
that we were doing everything we could just to get people to shelter in place and socially
distance. A lot of other companies have been doing the same, and I think the choices that
people are making are going to be predicated on a whole array of factors: the rates of
local transmission; governmental expectations; the ability to work from home; the
individual characteristics of the workers themselves, how much risk they might have or how
much risk it would be for them to bring that back into their household if they have people
living in their household who would be at increased risk from morbidity, mortality, from
suffering and death, from COVID.

So these are individual and local considerations. I think for us as a company, we want to,
as we've talked about publicly, we want to continue to be a part of the public health
solution around social distancing, and so that for us means continuing to encourage
work-from-home for our employees and really only be in if it's essential that people are
in the workplace. And we've said publicly that we're going to be doing that for many
months to come. Now, here's one thing I do want to say, which is, working from home has
definite benefits, not only for the pandemic, but for some people, time for commute, etc.
I think we're already learning there are some downsides, and there are generic downsides,
even just not from work-from-home but school-from-home and just being at home, which is:
social isolation is real. It causes depression. It has physical impacts on people's
bodies; there's science around this.

So as the world is weighing, even beyond the pandemic, when we've achieved herd immunity
because we've been able to vaccinate the world with a functioning vaccine that creates
immunity, I think probably a lot of workplaces are going to want to encourage
work-from-home. But I just want us also to remember that part of humanity is community,
and so we'll have to be thinking through how we balance those activities. CA: And, of
course, there are huge swathes of the economy that can't work from home. We're a lucky few
who can. And speaking of which, here's a question from Otho Kerr. "Vulnerable communities
seem to be receiving a disproportionate amount of misinformation. What is Google doing to
help make sure these communities are receiving accurate news rather than fake news?"KD:
You know, vulnerable communities is where I have spent most of my career focused. I think
with many things that we've learned as a society in this pandemic were things that we,
frankly, should have known.

And before I get to the information, I'll just talk about access to services, which is to
say, and to brag, I guess, on my hometown of New Orleans. One of the early things that New
Orleans learned, or remembered or whatever, was that drive-through testing only works if
you have a car. So you need walk-up testing, and it needs to be in the neighborhood. We
need to meet people where they are, and it's thematic of all the work that we did after
Hurricane Katrina in New Orleans was to build back a health care and public health
infrastructure that was community-oriented, built with community not for community. Of all
the many things that I really do hope last from this pandemic, one of them, though, is
that we're being much more conscious of building with especially vulnerable communities
and building out policies and processes that are as inclusive as possible. For Google
information, we start with, on the search platform, for example, adding up knowledge
panels, that we spend time making sure are linguistically and culturally
appropriate.

We tend to start globally, with global authoritative groups like the World Health
Organization or the National Health Service or CDC, and then we begin to build down to
more focused jurisdictions. On other platforms that we have like YouTube, we've built out
special channels where we do, because it's a platform and we can host content, we've
partnered with creatives — we call them, I don't know, that's a new thing for me because
I'm a doctor — but we've partnered with creatives and influencers whose reach resonates
with communities. We have had particular programming, for example, for seniors,
African-Americans, so "vulnerable" takes on a lot of meaning for us globally and in the US
context. Our work is not done, and we certainly every day are thinking about how we can do
more to see that the information is accessible, accurate and also, frankly, interesting so
that people want to engage. CA: Yeah. Alright, thank you Karen.

I'll be back in a bit with some other questions. WPR: Thank you, Chris. And you know, and
this is really wonderful talking about more broadly, where you see tech and public health
going, and specifically, talking about these vulnerable communities. And I think one
thing, even just beyond Google, it would be interesting to sort of hear your thoughts on
where you see tech in general better serving public health, if there are spaces that you
think, no matter which tech company we're talking about, we could all sort of come
together to better serve the community. Do you have any thoughts on that? KD: I could spend
several hours talking to you about that, but maybe I'll just start by saying that I came
to tech through the pathway of direct patient care and public health service in local
community, and I ended up in a role in the federal government as the National Coordinator
for Health IT, which, for my background, felt unusual to me, I'm just being
honest.

And I thought, well, I'm not really a tech person, but the secretary at the time said,
"That's exactly why we need you, because we need to apply tech." And she had had the
unfortunate experience of hearing me chirp about how public health needed more timely data
to make better evidence-based policy on behalf of community and with community. This was a
source of frustration for me as a local public health officer, that sometimes the data I
was working on, though great, was stale by the time I needed to make decisions about
chronic disease interventions, or mental health or even violence or intimate partner
violence issues in my community. And so the desire to make data useful and accessible to
support people in communities is something that's been burning in me for a long time, and
what I have learned since I have been out in Silicon Valley is that that desire burns in
the bellies of many people who work at Google and Apple and other companies, and it's been
really wonderful to see, during this horrible time of the pandemic, the incredibly
brilliant engineering and programming and other minds at a company like Google turn their
attention on how can we partner with consumers and with public health to do the right
thing, to bring the resources that we have to bear. And I said I could talk all day about
it because I have many examples from the work that we have done at Google.

Maybe I'll just point out a couple. One is to say that we very early on wanted to find a
crisp way to help people understand what they could to protect themselves and their
community, to flatten the curve, get the R naught less than one, and this "Do the Five"
work that our teams, largely in marketing but then a lot of other people weighed in. It
required massive amounts of talent to make that available on our landing page, on search,
and then fold it out more broadly. We did that in partnership with the World Health
Organization, then the CDC, then with countries all across the world to get simple
messaging about staying home if you can and coughing into your elbow, washing your hands.
These are basic public health messages that public health has been, frankly, even in flu
season trying to get the word out, but it became, the resources at a company like a
Google, and the reach to billions, it's a platform and a set of talents that aren't even
the technical, computer vision kind of stuff that you would typically think
about.

Many other companies in Silicon Valley have weighed in in the same way. I think similarly,
we've been thinking through how we can use tools like the community mobility reports. This
is something, a business backer like we have for restaurants. The engineers and scientists
said, what if we applied that to retail and grocery stores and transportation to get a
snapshot in a community of whether people were using those areas less, whether people were
adhering to local public health expectations and sheltering in place, and give that
information not only to public health but to the public to help inspire them to do more
for their community as well as for themselves. So there has been, I think what I'm trying
to say, Whitney, is I think there's a natural marriage, and COVID has been an accelerant
use case to demonstrate how that can work, and it is my expectation that companies like
Google who, certainly for us it's in our DNA to be involved in health, will want to
continue working on this going forward, because it's really not just good for what we need
to get done in this pandemic, but public health and prevention are part and parcel of how
we create opportunity and equity in all communities across the world.

So I'm passionate about the work of public health and very passionate about partnership.
Can I just say one more thing? WPR: Absolutely. KD: Which is to say that one of the first
things that I did before the pandemic started, I had just started in December, and then in
January, I did a listening session with consumers about what they wanted, and they said
something kind of similar to what you said, which I just want to call out, and that is,
they wanted partnership, they wanted transparency and they really felt like there was
quite a lot that tech in general could do to help them on their health journey. But their
ask was that we did it in a transparent way and we did it in a partnered way with them.
And so as we move out of the pandemic, and we're thinking more about consumers, I want to
carry some of this spirit also of prevention and helpfulness and transparency into the
work that we're going to continue to do for people every day.

<!--
ad_duration=3.33
comment_count=7
event="TED2020"
has_talk_citation=0
intro_duration=11.82
is_subtitle_required="False"
is_talk_featured="True"
language="en"
language_swap="False"
native_language="en"
number_of_related_talks=6
number_of_speakers=3
number_of_subtitled_videos=1
number_of_tags=7
number_of_talk_download_languages=1
number_of_talk_more_resources=0
number_of_talk_recommendations=1
number_of_talks_take_actions=1
post_ad_duration=0.83
published_timestamp="2020-06-03 19:56:23"
recording_date="2020-05-18"
speaker_description="Chief Health Officer, Google"
speaker_is_published=1
speaker_name="Karen DeSalvo"
talk_more_resources=[]
talk_name="How tech companies can help combat the pandemic and reshape public health"
talk_recommendations_blurb="More resources curated by Karen DeSalvo"
talks_tags=["public-health","coronavirus","technology","pandemic","google","health","health-care"]
url_photo_speaker="https://pe.tedcdn.com/images/ted/7702aef673adb5cac322d1b2a242947d103cf1ec_254x191.jpg"
url_photo_talk="https://s3.amazonaws.com/talkstar-photos/uploads/8bc3b188-7f74-48a5-b48f-e8cd17093d26/KarenDeSalvo_2020S-embed.jpg"
url_webpage="https://www.ted.com/talks/karen_desalvo_how_tech_companies_can_help_combat_the_pandemic_and_reshape_public_health"
video_type_name="TED Stage Talk"
-->