---
title: The galactic recipe for a living planet
speaker: Karin Öberg
description: >-
 Did you know that one of the most notorious poisons is also a key ingredient for
 life as we know it? Join space chemist Karin Öberg and learn how she scans the
 universe in search of this paradoxical chemical using ALMA, the world's largest
 radio telescope, to detect hotbeds of molecular activity and the formation of
 life-sustaining planets.
date: 2019-11-01
tags: ["planets","space","chemistry","exploration","discovery","science","cosmos","universe","life"]
slug: karin_oberg_the_galactic_recipe_for_a_living_planet
---

So I'm pretty sure that I'm not the only one in this room who at some point have found
myself, you know, looking up towards the stars, and wondered, you know, "Are we it, or are
there other living planets out there such as our own?" I guess it is possible that I'm
then the only person who has obsessed enough about that question to make it my career. But
moving on. How do we get to this question? Well, I would argue the first thing to do is to
turn our eyes back down from the sky to our own planet, the Earth. And think about just
how lucky did the Earth have to be to be the living planet it is. Well, it had to be at
least somewhat lucky. Had we been sitting closer to the Sun or a bit further away, any
water that we have had would have boiled off or frozen over. And I mean, it's not a given
that a planet has water on it. So had we been a dry planet, there would not have been a
lot of life on it.

And even if we had had all the water that we have today, if that water had not been
accompanied by the right kind of chemicals to get life going, we would have a wet planet,
but just as dead. So it's so many things that can go wrong, what are the chances that they
go right? What are the chances that the planet forms with at least the basic ingredients
needed to have an origins of life happening? Well, let's explore that together. So if
you're going to have a living planet, the first thing you're going to need is a
planet.

But not any planet will do. You're probably going to need a rather specific and earthlike
planet. A planet that is rocky, so you can have both oceans and land, and it's sitting
neither too close nor too far away from its star, but at the just-right temperature. And
it's just right for liquid water, that is. So how many of these planets do we have in our
galaxy? Well, one of the great discoveries of the past decades is that planets are
incredibly common. Almost every star has a planet around them. Some have many. And among
these planets, on the order of a few percent are earthlike enough that we would consider
them potentially living planets. So having the right kind of planet is actually not that
difficult when we consider that there's about 100 billion stars in our galaxy. So that
gives you about a billion potential living planets. But it's not enough to just be at the
right temperature or have the right overall composition. You also need the right
chemicals.

And what the second and important ingredient to make a living planet is — I think it's
pretty intuitive — it's water. After all, we did define our planet as being potentially
living if it had the right temperature to keep water liquid. And I mean, here on Earth,
life is water-based. But more generally, water is just really good as a meeting place for
chemicals. It is a very special liquid. So this is our second basic ingredient. Now the
third ingredient, I think, is probably a little bit more surprising. I mean, we are going
to need some organics in there, since we are thinking about organic life. But the organic
molecule that seems to be at the center of the chemical networks that can produce
biomolecules is hydrogen cyanide. So for those of you who know what this molecule is like,
you know it's something that it's a good idea to stay away from. But it turns out that
what's really, really bad for advanced life forms, such as yourselves, is really, really
good to get the chemistry started, the right kind of chemistry that can lead to origins of
life. So now we have our three ingredients that we need, you know, the temperate planet,
water and hydrogen cyanide.

So how often do these three come together? How many temperate planets are there out there
that have water and hydrogen cyanide? Well, in an ideal world, we would now turn one of
our telescopes towards one of these temperate planets and check for ourselves. Just, "Do
these planets have water and cyanides on them?" Unfortunately, we don't yet have large
enough telescopes to do this. We can detect molecules in the atmospheres of some planets.
But these are large planets sitting often pretty close to their star, nothing like these,
you know, just-right planets that we're talking about here, which are much smaller and
further away. So we have to come up with another way. And the other way that we have
conceived of and then followed is to instead of looking for these molecules in the planets
when they exist, is to look for them in the material that's forming new planets. So
planets form in discs of dust and gas around young stars.

And these discs get their material from the interstellar medium. Turns out that the empty
space you see between stars when you are looking up towards them, asking existential
questions, is not as empty as it seems, but actually full of gas and dust, which can, you
know, come together in clouds, then collapses to form these discs, stars and planets. And
one of the things we always see when we do look at these clouds is water. You know, I
think we have a tendency to think about water as something that's, you know, special to
us. Water is one of the most abundant molecules in the universe, including in these
clouds, these star- and planet-forming clouds. And not only that — water is also a pretty
robust molecule: it's actually not that easy to destroy. So a lot of this water that is in
interstellar medium will survive the rather dangerous, collapsed journey from clouds to
disc, to planet. So water is alright. That second ingredient is not going to be a
problem.

Most planets are going to form with some access to water. So what about hydrogen cyanide?
Well, we also see cyanides and other similar organic molecules in these interstellar
clouds. But here, we're less certain about the molecules surviving, going from the cloud
to the disc. They're just a bit more delicate, a bit more fragile. So if we're going to
know that this hydrogen cyanide is sitting in the vicinity of new planets forming, we'd
really need to see it in the disc itself, in these planet-forming discs. So about a decade
ago, I started a program to look for this hydrogen cyanide and other molecules in these
planet-forming discs. And this is what we found. So good news, in these six images, those
bright pixels represent emissions originating from hydrogen cyanide in planet-forming
discs hundreds of light-years away that have made it to our telescope, onto the detector,
allowing us to see it like this. So the very good news is that these discs do indeed have
hydrogen cyanide in them.

That last, more elusive ingredient. Now the bad news is that we don't know where in the
disc it is. If we look at these, I mean, no one can say they are beautiful images, even at
the time when we got them. You see the pixel size is pretty big and it's actually bigger
than these discs themselves. So each pixel here represents something that's much bigger
than our solar system. And that means that we don't know where in the disc the hydrogen
cyanide is coming from. And that's a problem, because these temperate planets, they can't
access hydrogen cyanide just anywhere, but it must be fairly close to where they assemble
for them to have access to it. So to bring this home, let's think about an analogous
example, that is, of cypress growing in the United States. So let's say, hypothetically,
that you've returned from Europe where you have seen beautiful Italian cypresses, and you
want to understand, you know, does it make sense to import them to the United States.
Could you grow them here?

So you talk to the cypress experts, they tell you that there is indeed a band of
not-too-hot, not-too-cold across the United States where you could grow them. And if you
have a nice, high-resolution map or image like this, it's quite easy to see that this
cypress strip overlaps with a lot of green fertile land pixels. Even if I start degrading
this map quite a bit, making it lower and lower resolution, it's still possible to tell
that there's going to be some fertile land overlapping with this strip. But what about if
the whole United States is incorporated into a single pixel? If the resolution is that
low. What do you do now, how do you now tell whether you can grow cypresses in the United
States? Well the answer is you can't. I mean, there's definitely some fertile land there,
or you wouldn't have that green tint to the pixel, but there's just no way of telling
whether any of that green is in the right place. And that is exactly the problem we were
facing with our single-pixel images of these discs with hydrogen cyanide.

So what we need is something analogous, at least those low-resolution maps that I just
showed you, to be able to tell whether there's overlap between where the hydrogen cyanide
is and where these planets can access it as they are forming. So coming to the rescue, a
few years ago, is this new, amazing, beautiful telescope ALMA, the Atacama Large
Millimeter and submillimeter Array in northern Chile. So, ALMA is amazing in many
different ways, but the one that I'm going to focus on is that, as you can see, I call
this one telescope, but you can there are actually many dishes in this image. And this is
a telescope that consists of 66 individual dishes that all work in unison. And that means
that you have a telescope that is the size of the largest distance that you can put these
dishes away from one another. Which in ALMA's case are a few miles. So you have a more
than mile-sized telescope. And when you have such a big telescope, you can zoom in on
really small things, including making maps of hydrogen cyanide in these planet-forming
discs. So when ALMA came online a few years ago, that was one of the first things that I
proposed that we use it for.

And what does a map of hydrogen cyanide look like in a disc? Is the hydrogen cyanide at
the right place? And the answer is that it is. So this is the map. You see the hydrogen
cyanide emission being spread out across the disc. First of all, it's almost everywhere,
which is very good news. But you have a lot of extra bright emission coming from close to
the star towards the center of the disc. And this is exactly where we want to see it. This
is close to where these planets are forming. And this is not what we see just towards one
disc — here are three more examples. You can see they all show the same thing — lots of
bright hydrogen cyanide emission coming from close to the center of the star. For full
disclosure, we don't always see this. There are discs where we see the opposite, where
there's actually a hole in the emission towards the center. So this is the opposite of
what we want to see, right?

This is not places where we could research if there is any hydrogen cyanide around where
these planets are forming. But in most cases, we just don't detect hydrogen cyanide, but
we detect it in the right place. So what does all this mean? Well, I told you in the
beginning that we have lots of these temperate planets, maybe a billion or so of them,
that could have life develop on them if they have the right ingredients. And I've also
shown that we think a lot of the time, the right ingredients are there — we have water, we
have hydrogen cyanide, there will be other organic molecules as well coming with the
cyanides. This means that planets with the most basic ingredients for life are likely to
be incredibly common in our galaxy. And if all it takes for life to develop is to have
these basic ingredients available, there should be a lot of living planets out there. But
that is of course a big if.

And I would say the challenge of the next decades, for both astronomy and chemistry, is to
figure out just how often we go from having a potentially living planet to having an
actually living one. Thank you.

<!--
ad_duration=3.33
comment_count=14
event="TED@NAS"
external_duration=0
external_start_time=0
has_talk_citation=1
intro_duration=11.82
is_subtitle_required="False"
is_talk_featured="True"
language="en"
language_swap="False"
native_language="en"
number_of_related_talks=6
number_of_speakers=1
number_of_subtitled_videos=14
number_of_tags=9
number_of_talk_download_languages=14
number_of_talk_more_resources=1
number_of_talk_recommendations=1
number_of_talks_take_actions=0
post_ad_duration=0.83
published_timestamp="2020-04-10 19:53:34"
recording_date="2019-11-01"
speaker_description="Space chemist"
speaker_is_published=1
speaker_name="Karin Öberg"
talk_name="The galactic recipe for a living planet"
talk_recommendations_blurb="More resources curated by Karin Öberg"
talks_tags=["planets","space","chemistry","exploration","discovery","science","cosmos","universe","life"]
talks_take_action=[]
url_photo_speaker="https://pe.tedcdn.com/images/ted/bb197d5440578877381d13ddf3ab0edb8e2f8ce2_254x191.jpg"
url_photo_talk="https://s3.amazonaws.com/talkstar-photos/uploads/132a0f9e-b9e0-4545-a95a-2bd18b58f1da/KarinOberg_2019S-embed.jpg"
url_webpage="https://www.ted.com/talks/karin_oberg_the_galactic_recipe_for_a_living_planet"
video_type_name="TED Institute Talk"
-->