---
title: A dose of reality about generic drugs
speaker: Katherine Eban
description: >-
 Investigative journalist Katherine Eban set out to report on a seemingly
 straightforward question: Are generic drugs really identical to their brand-name
 counterparts? The answer sparked a decade of interviews, meetings with whistleblowers,
 on-the-ground reporting across four continents and digging into confidential FDA
 documents. In this alarming talk, she takes us inside overseas manufacturing
 plants and exposes the fraud behind many low-cost generic medicines.
date: 2020-03-04
tags: ["journalism","pharmaceuticals","public-health","medicine","health","corruption"]
slug: katherine_eban_a_dose_of_reality_about_generic_drugs
---

In 2008, I got an unusual phone call from a guy named Joe Graedon. Joe said he was getting
flooded with complaints from patients who had recently been switched to generic drugs. Joe
was a trained pharmacologist and cohost of a radio show on NPR. Patient after patient said
their generics were causing unwelcome side effects or even relapses. Joe believed the
patients' claims. But when he reported these complaints to the FDA, officials there
argued, "It was probably psychosomatic. Patients are upset by pills that look different
from their old ones." Joe didn't buy it. He wanted someone with investigative firepower to
dig into this, and since I was an investigative journalist, he called me. And then he
posed a question that I couldn't get out of my head: "Katherine, what is wrong with the
drugs?"I spent the next 10 years trying to track down the answer. Our health care system
relies on generics. My family does, too.

But a decade of interviews, meetings with whistleblowers, on-the-ground reporting across
four continents and thousands of confidential files — from the FDA, from generic drug
companies and from the courts — all pointed me in the same direction: a large number of
generic drug manufacturers in certain overseas countries are passing off substandard drugs
as legitimate generics for profit. They are deliberately flouting FDA regulations and
standards. Basically, they are committing fraud. In the process, they are risking the
health of patients around the world. They may even be costing patient lives. One leading
company in India has already shut down because of this activity. I wanted to know, was
that company an outlier or the tip of the iceberg? What I uncovered is disquieting, and
anyone who takes generic drugs has the right to be deeply concerned. If you're skeptical
about any of this, that's fair.

I saw generics as one of the world's great public health innovations, a giant win for
patients worldwide. Ninety percent of our drugs today are generic. I knew generic HIV/AIDS
medicine had saved many lives in Africa. Here at home, programs from Medicare to Medicaid
and the Affordable Care Act depended on them. In an overpriced drug market, generics were
the heroic underdog. But my biggest assumption was based on the FDA's reassurance that
properly regulated generic drugs are not only safe and effective, but bioequivalent,
interchangeable with the brand and with one another. Well, that's true — if companies
follow the rules on paper. But inside far-flung drug plants, I uncovered a different,
unwritten set of rules. I started my investigation by focusing on the regulatory framework.
Right away, one fact surprised me: the FDA does not vet manufacturer applications by
testing the drugs. Instead, it reviews company data.

As the FDA's generic drugs director actually told me, "The approval system requires the
ethical behavior of the applicant. Otherwise, the whole house of cards will fall down."
Really? It's the honor system?

After nine months of digging, I published my first article on generics. I wrote about
patients who'd been switched to generic drugs and suffered medical setbacks. I quoted
doctors who questioned whether generics really were bioequivalent to the brand. A month
later, I got an anonymous email from someone calling himself "Four Dollar
Refill."

Four dollars is what you'd pay to fill a generic prescription at Walmart. Four Dollar
Refill worked inside the generic drug industry. He said if I really wanted to uncover the
problem, I'd better go look where the majority of our generic drugs are made: in India and
China. Four Dollar Refill was right; 80 percent of the plants making the active ingredient
for all our drugs, brand or generic, are overseas, mostly in China and India. Any generic
drug company anywhere in the world wanting approval to sell its drugs into our market has
to follow elaborate rules known as "Good Manufacturing Practices."I decided to learn every
detail of how to manufacture a legitimate generic drug. At a top New Jersey lab, I watched
as technicians ran tests on specialized machines and used flasks that mimic stomach
conditions to measure drug dissolution. But one remarkable fact jumped out. The lab banned
Wite-Out — correction fluid — across its facility.

Under FDA rules, data serves as the cornerstone of quality. It has to be gathered at each
manufacturing step, preserved and shared with regulators. Wite-Out was high-risk. It
invited tampering. It was clear that for the FDA's regulatory regime to succeed, any
company applying for approval had to be ethical, and its data had to be unaltered. But
what if neither was true? What if the applicant was not ethical? What if the data was not
pristine? I started to hear about a company in India called Ranbaxy, India's largest drug
company, one of its first successful multinationals and one of the fastest-growing generic
suppliers to the US market. A whistleblower was supplying internal Ranbaxy documents to
the FDA. I got copies. Deciphering the company's charts, graphs and numbers unveiled a
shocking swindle. They substituted unapproved, lower-purity ingredients. They invented
documents like standard operating procedures, steaming them overnight in a sauna-like room
to make them look old.

They conjured up three-, six-, nine- and 18-month stability studies, all generated on the
same day. Gradually, I was able to unearth the story behind this regulatory nightmare. In
2004, Ranbaxy hired a new research and development director. He suspected something was
amiss. He ordered a young engineer named Dinesh Thakur to study the data in every drug
application to find out if it was real or fake. Thakur eventually put together a
devastating PowerPoint showing Ranbaxy had falsified data for over 200 products in more
than 40 countries. The new R and D director showed this PowerPoint to a subcommittee of
the board of directors. The subcommittee ordered the report and the laptop on which it was
created destroyed. Then they forced Thakur out of the company. Thakur couldn't sleep,
thinking about Ranbaxy's perilously bad drugs. So he risked his life to alert the FDA.
After an eight-year investigation, Ranbaxy pled guilty to seven felonies for faking
data. An FDA consultant taught me that just like cheap clothing made in distant factories,
or "fast fashion," as she called it, there were fast drugs, too, made in pharmaceutical
sweatshops overseas with low-quality ingredients and manufacturing shortcuts.

In Mexico City, I sat in a bar with a whistleblower. He handed me documents revealing how
the cost-cutting generic drug plant where he worked had knowingly released drug batches
that contained glass particles. In Accra, capital of Ghana, doctors explained how low-cost
Indian and Chinese medicine of all kinds barely seemed to work, even when they doubled and
tripled the doses. In Mumbai, I met another whistleblower from a company that I had
believed was ethical. He sat there and described the well-oiled machinery of data
manipulation his company used to get compromised drugs approved fast. With tears running
down his cheeks, he said, "What's going on in the industry is very, very, very dirty."In
the US, a confidential source who worked in the government handed me a thumb drive
containing over 20,000 internal FDA documents. The emails and memos revealed how the
agency's public health mission — protecting consumers — often clashed with its political
mission — showing Congress a steady stream of low-cost drug approvals.

I also learned about the FDA's compromised inspection system for overseas drug plants. In
the US, FDA investigators arrive unannounced to do surprise inspections. But overseas, the
FDA gives manufacturing plants months of advance notice. It asks for the company's help
arranging ground transportation and hotels. My sources also talked about staged
inspections, where teams of data fabricators invent or alter needed documents to create a
facade of compliance long before the FDA arrives. One intrepid FDA investigator named Peter
Baker figured out how to find the truth. He ignored the data printouts, and he looked
inside company computers. When files were deleted, he found metadata revealing hidden
tests. The companies were prescreening their drugs, figuring how to alter the official
tests so they would meet FDA specifications. As I said, this problem is more than a
handful of bad actors. Over four years, Peter Baker inspected 86 plants in India and
China.

He found evidence of fraud in 67 of them. Wonder what happens to a batch of drugs that
fails testing? It should get thrown out. Instead, low-cost plants usually sell them into
poorly regulated markets that don't realize what they're getting, places like Africa,
Southeast Asia and India itself. The overseas generics industry calls this "dual-track
production" — better drugs for some, failed drugs for others. In the developing world,
this corrupt system has flooded the market with so many bad drugs that public health
researchers link them to the rise of drug-resistant infections. But criminal behavior by
overseas companies is only half the problem. Though some regulators apparently don't
realize they're being conned, in the US, our regulators appear willing to overlook
transgressions in order to continue green-lighting low-cost medicine. As a result, some
American patients have gotten generic drugs with toxic impurities, unapproved ingredients,
dangerous particulates or that are not bioequivalent.

As the FDA investigator Peter Baker put it, if people actually understood, then nobody
would take these drugs. Are there ways to solve this global problem? Yes, there are.
Solutions begin with recognizing that our current honor system for drug regulation is a
relic of a bygone age. Science evolves. Medicine evolves. The global economy evolves.
Shouldn't regulation evolve with them? Only one approach can guarantee quality generics:
rigorous oversight, including unannounced inspections and systematic testing of drugs.
Rigorous oversight means that regulators don't just look at printouts of data that may or
may not be genuine. Effective solutions also depend on giving the average patient more
information. We know where our breakfast cereal and our running shoes are manufactured.
Why is it different for generic drugs? Patients can do something else. They can tell their
elected officials and consumer organizations to speak up just as loudly to demand quality
as they do to demand access.

Consumer organizations can do their members a great service by testing and ranking
generics, just like cars and washing machines. The big pharmacy chains owe it to the
public to test the drugs they dispense. A trip to the pharmacy for affordable medicine
shouldn't come with a hidden cost. Now is the time for all of us who care about patient
safety to act on what we know. Thank you.

<!--
ad_duration=3.33
comment_count=12
event="TEDMED 2020"
has_talk_citation=1
intro_duration=11.82
is_subtitle_required="False"
is_talk_featured="True"
language="en"
language_swap="False"
native_language="en"
number_of_related_talks=6
number_of_speakers=1
number_of_subtitled_videos=1
number_of_tags=6
number_of_talk_download_languages=1
number_of_talk_more_resources=2
number_of_talk_recommendations=0
number_of_talks_take_actions=0
post_ad_duration=0.83
published_timestamp="2020-06-17 20:04:43"
recording_date="2020-03-04"
speaker_description="Investigative journalist"
speaker_is_published=1
speaker_name="Katherine Eban"
talk_name="A dose of reality about generic drugs"
talks_tags=["journalism","pharmaceuticals","public-health","medicine","health","corruption"]
talks_take_action=[]
url_photo_speaker="https://pe.tedcdn.com/images/ted/65253e5f63d1a07c88ddc707e17d629318d81b7e_254x191.jpg"
url_photo_talk="https://s3.amazonaws.com/talkstar-photos/uploads/6b9cd419-031b-4435-affd-95834d86f4a4/KatherineEban_2020P-embed.jpg"
url_webpage="https://www.ted.com/talks/katherine_eban_a_dose_of_reality_about_generic_drugs"
video_type_name="TED Stage Talk"
-->