---
title: What investigating neural pathways can reveal about mental health
speaker: Kay M. Tye
description: >-
 Neuroscientist Kay M. Tye investigates how your brain gives rise to complex
 emotional states like depression, anxiety or loneliness. From the cutting edge of
 science, she shares her latest findings -- including the development of a tool
 that uses light to activate specific neurons and create dramatic behavioral
 changes in mice. Learn how these discoveries could change the way you think about
 your mind -- and possibly uncover effective treatments for mental disorders.
date: 2019-11-01
tags: ["neuroscience","brain","psychology","mental-health","science","medical-research"]
slug: kay_m_tye_what_investigating_neural_pathways_can_reveal_about_mental_health
---

I'm going to start by saying something you think you know to be true. Your brain creates
all facets of your mind. So then why do we treat mental and physical illnesses so
differently, if we think we know that the mind comes from the brain? As a neuroscientist,
I'm often told that I'm not allowed to study how internal states like anxiety or craving
or loneliness are represented by the brain, and so I decided to set out and do exactly
that. My research program is designed to understand the mind by investigating brain
circuits. Specifically, how does our brain give rise to emotion. It's really hard to study
feelings and emotions, because you can't measure them. Behavior is still the best and only
window into the emotional experience of another. For both animals and people, yes,
self-report is a behavioral output. Motivated behaviors fall into two general classes:
seeking pleasure and avoiding pain.

The ability to approach things that are good for you and avoid things that are bad for you
is fundamental to survival. And in our modern-day society, trouble telling the difference
can be labeled as a mental illness. If I was having car trouble, and I took my car to the
mechanic, the first thing they do is look under the hood. But with mental health research,
you can't just pop open the hood with the press of a button. So this is why we do
experiments on animals. Specifically, in my lab, mice. To understand the brain, well, we
need to study brains. And for the first time, we actually can. We can pop open the hood.
We can look inside and do an experiment and see what comes out. Technology has opened new
windows into the black box that is our minds. The development of optogenetic tools has
allowed us unprecedented control over specific neurons in the brain and how they talk to
each other by firing electrical signals.

We can genetically engineer neurons to be light sensitive and then use light to control
how neurons fire. This can change an animal's behavior, giving us insight into what that
neural circuit can do. Want to know how scientists figure this out? Scientists developed
optogenetic tools by borrowing knowledge from other basic science fields. Algae are
single-celled organisms that have evolved to swim towards light. And when blue light
shines onto the eyespot of an algae cell, a channel opens, sending an electrical signal
that makes little flagella flap and propels the algae towards sunlight. If we clone this
light-sensitive part of the algae and then add it to neurons through genetic modification,
we can make neurons light-sensitive, too. Except, with neurons, when we shine light down
an optical fiber deep into the brain, we change how they send electrical signals to other
neurons in the brain and thus change the animal's behavior. With the help of my colleagues,
I pioneered the use of optogenetic tools to selectively target neurons that are living in
point A, sending messages down wires aimed at point B, leaving neighboring neurons going
other places unaffected.

This approach allowed us to test the function of each wire within the tangled mess that is
our brain. A brain region called the amygdala has long been thought to be important for
emotion, and my laboratory discovered that the amygdala resembles a fork in the road where
activating one path can drive positive emotion and approach, and activating another path
can drive negative emotion and avoidance. I'm going to show you a couple of examples — a
taste of raw data — of how we can use optogenetics to target specific neurons in the brain
and get very specific changes in behavior. Anxiety patients have abnormal communication
between two parts of the amygdala, but in people, it's hard to know if this abnormality is
cause or effect of the disease. We can use optogenetics to target the same pathway in a
mouse, and see what happens. So this is the elevated plus maze. It's a widely used anxiety
test that measures the amount of time that the mouse spends in the safety of the closed
arms relative to exploring the open arms.

Mice have evolved to prefer enclosed spaces, like the safety of their burrows, but to find
food, water, mates, they need to go out into the open where they're more vulnerable to
predatory threats. So I'm sitting in the background here, and I'm about to flip the
switch. And now, when I flip the switch and turn the light on, you can see the mouse
begins to explore the open arms of the maze more. And in contrast to drug treatments for
anxiety, there's no sedation, no locomotor impairment, just coordinated, natural-looking
exploration. So not only is the effect almost immediate, but there are no detectable side
effects. Now, when I flip the switch off, you can see that the mouse goes back to its
normal brain function and back to its corner. When I was in the lab and I was taking these
data, I was all by myself, and I was so excited. I was so excited, I did one of these
quiet screams.

Aah!

Why was I so excited? I mean, yeah, theoretically, I knew that the brain controlled the
mind, but to flip the switch with my hand and see the mouse change its behavioral state so
rapidly and so reversibly, it was really the first time that I truly believed it. Since
that first breakthrough, there have been a number of other discoveries. Finding specific
neural circuits that can elicit dramatic changes in animal behavior. Here's another
example: compulsive overeating. We can eat for two reasons. Seeking pleasure, like tasty
food, or avoiding pain, like being hungry. How can we find a treatment for compulsive
overeating without messing up the hunger-driven feeding that we need to survive? The first
step is to understand how the brain gives rise to feeding behavior. This fully-fed mouse
is just exploring a space completely devoid of any food. Here we're using optogenetics to
target neurons living in the hypothalamus, sending messages down wires aimed at the
midbrain.

When I turn the light on, right here, you can see that the mouse immediately begins
licking the floor.

This seemingly frenzied behavior is about to escalate into something I find really
incredible. It's kind of trippy, actually. Ready? It's right here. See, he picks up his
hands as if he is eating a piece of food, but there's nothing there, he's not holding
anything. So this circuit is sufficient to drive feeding behavior in the absence of
hunger, even in the absence of food. I can't know for sure how this mouse is feeling, but
I speculate these neurons drive craving based on the behaviors we elicit when we target
this pathway. Turn the light back off — animal's back to normal. When we silence this
pathway, we can suppress and reduce compulsive overeating without altering hunger-driven
feeding. What did you take away from these two videos that I just showed you? That making a
very specific change to neural circuits in the brain can have specific changes to
behavior. That every conscious experience that we have is governed by cells in our brain. I
am the daughter of a physicist and a biologist, who literally met on the boat coming to
America in pursuit of an education.

So naturally, since there was "no pressure" to be a scientist ...

as a college student, I had to decide whether I wanted to focus on psychology, the study
of the mind, or neuroscience, the study of the brain. And I chose neuroscience, because I
wanted to understand how the mind is born out of biological tissue. But really, I've come
full circle to do both. And now my research program bridges the gap between the mind and
the brain. Research from my laboratory suggests that we can begin to tie specific neural
circuits to emotional states. And we have found a number of circuits that control
anxiety-related behavior, compulsive overeating, social interaction, avoidance and many
other types of motivated behaviors that may reflect internal emotional states. We used to
think of functions of the mind as being defined by brain regions. But my work shows that
within a given brain region, there are many different neurons doing different things. And
these functions are partly defined by the paths they take. Here's a metaphor to help
illustrate how these discoveries change the way that we think about the
brain.

Let's say that the brain is analogous to the world and that neurons are analogous to
people. And we want to understand how information is transmitted across the planet. Sure,
it's useful to know where a given person is located when recording what they're saying.
But I would argue that it's equally important to know who this person is talking to, who
is listening and how the people listening respond to the information that they receive. The
current state of mental health treatment is essentially a strategy of trial and error. And
it is not working. The development of new drug therapies for mental health disorders has
hit a brick wall, with scarcely any real progress since the 1950s. So what does the future
hold? In the near future, I expect to see a mental health treatment revolution, where we
focus on specific neural circuits in the brain. Diagnoses will be made based on both
behavioral symptoms and measurable brain activity.

Further in the future, by combining our ability to make acute changes to the brain and get
acute changes to behavior with our knowledge of synaptic plasticity to make more permanent
changes, we could push the brain into a state of fixing itself by reprogramming neural
circuits. Exposure therapy at the circuit level. Once we switch the brain into a state of
self-healing, this could potentially have long-lasting effects with no side effects. I can
envision a future where neural circuit reprogramming represents a potential cure, not just
a treatment. OK, but what about right now? If from this very moment forward, each and every
one of you left this talk and truly believed that the mind comes entirely from cells in
your brain, then we could immediately get rid of negative perceptions and stigmas that
prevent so many people from getting the mental health support that they need. Mental health
professionals, we're always thinking about what's the next new treatment.

But before we can apply new treatments, we need people to feel comfortable seeking them.
Imagine how dramatically we could reduce the rates of suicides and school shootings if
everyone who needed mental health support actually got it. When we truly understand
exactly how the mind comes from the brain, we will improve the lives of everyone who will
have a mental illness in their lifetime — half the population — as well as everyone else
with whom they share the world. Thank you.

<!--
ad_duration=3.33
comment_count=35
event="TED@NAS"
external_duration=0
external_start_time=0
has_talk_citation=0
intro_duration=11.82
is_subtitle_required="False"
is_talk_featured="True"
language="en"
language_swap="False"
native_language="en"
number_of_related_talks=6
number_of_speakers=1
number_of_subtitled_videos=14
number_of_tags=6
number_of_talk_download_languages=14
number_of_talk_more_resources=1
number_of_talk_recommendations=1
number_of_talks_take_actions=0
post_ad_duration=0.83
published_timestamp="2020-03-05 20:47:48"
recording_date="2019-11-01"
speaker_description="Neuroscientist"
speaker_is_published=1
speaker_name="Kay M. Tye"
talk_name="What investigating neural pathways can reveal about mental health"
talk_recommendations_blurb="More resources from Kay M. Tye"
talks_tags=["neuroscience","brain","psychology","mental-health","science","medical-research"]
talks_take_action=[]
url_audio="https://download.ted.com/talks/KayTye_2019S.mp3?apikey=acme-roadrunner"
url_photo_speaker="https://pe.tedcdn.com/images/ted/36b80148dca9fc508d0f9be9486a19776a0a6aa1_254x191.jpg"
url_photo_talk="https://s3.amazonaws.com/talkstar-photos/uploads/9ecd4ab4-3a00-4ebb-8f33-53f20df7cb8f/KayTye_2019S-embed.jpg"
url_webpage="https://www.ted.com/talks/kay_m_tye_what_investigating_neural_pathways_can_reveal_about_mental_health"
video_type_name="TED Institute Talk"
-->