---
title: How to transform sinking cities into landscapes that fight floods
speaker: Kotchakorn Voraakhom
description: >-
 From London to Tokyo, climate change is causing cities to sink -- and our modern
 concrete infrastructure is making us even more vulnerable to severe flooding,
 says landscape architect and TED Fellow Kotchakorn Voraakhom. But what if we
 could design cities to help fight floods? In this inspiring talk, Voraakhom shows
 how she developed a massive park in Bangkok that can hold a million gallons of
 rainwater, calling for more climate change solutions that connect cities back to
 nature.
date: 2018-11-28
tags: ["ted-fellows","urban-planning","nature","community","sustainability","climate-change","design","architecture","cities","infrastructure","environment"]
slug: kotchakorn_voraakhom_how_to_transform_sinking_cities_into_landscapes_that_fight_floods
---

At this very moment, with every breath we take, major delta cities across the globe are
sinking, including New York, London, Tokyo, Shanghai, New Orleans, and as well as my city,
Bangkok. Here is the usual version of climate change. This is mine. Nothing much, just a
crocodile on the street.

This is an urgent impact of climate change: over sinking cities. Here, you can see the
urbanization of Bangkok, growing in every direction, shifting from porous, agricultural
land — the land that can breathe and absorb water — to a concrete jungle. This is what
parts of it look like after 30 minutes of rainfall. And every time it rains, I wish my car
could turn into a boat. This land has no room for water. It has lost its absorbent
capacity. The reality of Bangkok's metropolitan region is a city of 15 million people
living, working and commuting on top of a shifting, muddy river delta. Bangkok is sinking
more than one centimeter per year, which is four times faster than the rate of predicted
sea level rise. And we could be below sea level by 2030, which will be here too soon. There
is no coincidence that I am here as a landscape architect. As a child, I grew up in a row
house next to the busy road always filled with traffic.

In front of my house, there was a concrete parking lot, and that was my playground. The
only living creature I would find, and had fun with, were these sneaky little plants
trying to grow through the crack of the concrete pavement. My favorite game with friends
was to dig a bigger and bigger hole through this crack to let this little plant creep out
— sneak out more and more. And yes, landscape architecture gives me the opportunity to
continue my cracking ambition —

to connect this concrete land back to nature. Before, Thais — my people — we were adapted
to the cycle of the wet and dry season, and you could call us amphibious.

We lived both on land and on water. We were adapted to both. And flooding was a happy
event, when the water fertilized our land. But now, flooding means ... disaster. In 2011,
Thailand was hit by the most damaging and the most expensive flood disaster in our
history. Flooding has turned central Thailand into an enormous lake. Here, you can see the
scale of the flood in the center of the image, to the scale of Bangkok, outlined in
yellow. The water was overflowing from the north, making its way across several provinces.
Millions of my people, including me and my family, were displaced and homeless. Some had
to escape the city. Many were terrified of losing their home and their belongings, so they
stayed back in the flood with no electricity and clean water. For me, this flood reflects
clearly that our modern infrastructure, and especially our notion of fighting flood with
concrete, had made us so extremely vulnerable to the climate uncertainty.

But in the heart of this disaster, I found my calling. I cannot just sit and wait as my
city continues to sink. The city needed me, and I had the ability to fix this problem. Six
years ago, I started my project. My teams and I won the design competition for
Chulalongkorn Centenary Park. This was the big, bold mission of the first university in
Thailand for celebrating its hundredth anniversary by giving this piece of land as a
public park to our city. Having a park sounds very normal to many other cities, but not in
Bangkok, which has one of the lowest public green space per capita among megacities in
Asia. Our project's become the first new public park in almost 30 years. The 11-acre park
— a big green crack at the heart of Bangkok — opened just last year.(Applause and
cheers)Thank you.

For four years, we have pushed through countless meetings to convince and never give up to
convincing that this park isn't just for beautification or recreation: it must help the
city deal with water, it must help the city confront climate change. And here is how it
works. Bangkok is a flat city, so we harnessed the power of gravity by inclining the whole
park to collect every drop of rain. The gravity force pulls down the runoff from the
highest point to the lowest point. This park has three main elements that work as one
system. The first — the green roof. This is the biggest green roof in Thailand, with the
rainwater tanks and museum underneath. In the dry season, the collected rain can be used
to water the park for up to a month. The runoff on the green roof then falls through
wetlands with the native water plants that can help filter and help clean water. And at
the lower end, the retention pond collects all of the water. At this pond, there are water
bikes.

People can pedal and help clean water. Their exercise becomes an active part of the park
water system. When life gives you a flood, you have fun with the water.

Centenary Park gives room for people and room for water, which is exactly what we and our
cities need. This is an amphibious design. This park is not about getting rid of flood.
It's about creating a way to live with it. And not a single drop of rain is wasted in this
park. This park can hold and collect a million gallons of water.

Thank you.

Every given project, for me, is an opportunity to create more green cracks through this
concrete jungle by using landscape architecture as a solution, like turning this concrete
roof into an urban farm, which can help absorb rain; reduce urban heat island and grow
food in the middle of the city; reuse the abandoned concrete structure to become a green
pedestrian bridge; and another flood-proof park at Thammasat University, which nearly
completes the biggest green roof on an academic campus yet in Southeast Asia. Severe
flooding is our new normal, putting the southeast Asian region — the region with the most
coastline — at extreme risk. Creating a park is just one solution. The awareness of
climate change means we, in every profession we are involved, are increasingly obligated
to understand the climate risk and put whatever we are working on as part of the solution.
Because if our cities continue the way they are now, a similar catastrophe will happen
again ...

and again. Creating a solution in these sinking cities is like making the impossible
possible. And for that, I would like to share one word that I always keep in mind, that
is, "tangjai." The literal translation for "tang" is "to firmly stand," and "jai" means
"heart." Firmly stand your heart at your goal. In Thai language, when you commit to do
something, you put tangjai in front of your word, so your heart will be in your action. No
matter how rough the path, how big the crack, you push through to your goal, because
that's where your heart is. And yes, Thailand is home. This land is my only home, and
that's where I firmly stand my heart. Where do you stand yours? Thank you.

Thank you. Kòp kun ka.(Applause and cheers)

<!--
ad_duration=3.33
comment_count=13
event="TEDWomen 2018"
external_start_time=0
has_talk_citation=1
intro_duration=11.82
is_subtitle_required="False"
is_talk_featured="True"
language="en"
language_swap="False"
native_language="en"
number_of_related_talks=6
number_of_speakers=1
number_of_subtitled_videos=20
number_of_tags=11
number_of_talk_download_languages=20
number_of_talk_more_resources=0
number_of_talk_recommendations=1
number_of_talks_take_actions=1
post_ad_duration=0.83
published_timestamp="2019-01-22 15:52:15"
recording_date="2018-11-28"
speaker_description="Urban landscape architect"
speaker_is_published=1
speaker_name="Kotchakorn Voraakhom"
talk_more_resources=[]
talk_name="How to transform sinking cities into landscapes that fight floods"
talk_recommendations_blurb="More resources curated by Kotchakorn Voraakhom"
talks_tags=["ted-fellows","urban-planning","nature","community","sustainability","climate-change","design","architecture","cities","infrastructure","environment"]
url_audio="https://download.ted.com/talks/KotchakornVoraakhom_2018W.mp3?apikey=acme-roadrunner"
url_photo_speaker="https://pe.tedcdn.com/images/ted/30fee78822855d70ccf5253608f03b9591e9f754_254x191.jpg"
url_photo_talk="https://s3.amazonaws.com/talkstar-photos/uploads/541d915a-559f-43d0-be04-8f2f8d960c3c/KotchakornVoraakhom_2016W-embed.jpg"
url_webpage="https://www.ted.com/talks/kotchakorn_voraakhom_how_to_transform_sinking_cities_into_landscapes_that_fight_floods"
video_type_name="TED Stage Talk"
-->