---
title: A creative solution for the water crisis in Flint, Michigan
speaker: LaToya Ruby Frazier
description: >-
 Artist LaToya Ruby Frazier spent five months living in Flint, Michigan,
 documenting the lives of those affected by the city's water crisis for her photo
 essay "Flint is Family." As the crisis dragged on, she realized it was going to
 take more than a series of photos to bring relief. In this inspiring, surprising
 talk, she shares the creative lengths she went to in order to bring free, clean
 water to the people of Flint.
date: 2019-09-24
tags: ["photography","social-change","water","art","activism"]
slug: latoya_ruby_frazier_a_creative_solution_for_the_water_crisis_in_flint_michigan
---

So, in 2016, I was commissioned to produce a photo essay about the water crisis in Flint,
Michigan. And that's been going on since 2014. And I accepted the commission with the idea
that I would photograph three generations of women dealing with the crisis on a daily
basis. I was fortunate to meet two best friends, artists, activists and poets Amber Hasan
and Shea Cobb, who took me around Flint. As a school bus driver, Shea Cobb became the
central figure of the photo essay, along with her mother, Ms. Ren√©e, and her
eight-year-old daughter, Zion. I obsessively followed Shea's school bus routes. And when
Shea wasn't driving the bus, she would be watching over Zion, making sure she was
studying. I embedded myself in every intimate facet of Shea's life. When Shea took me to
Zion's school, and I saw the water fountains covered with signs that said, "Contaminated.
Do not drink," I couldn't pick up my camera to photograph it.

It rocked me to the core to see that in America, we can go from fountains that say
"Whites" or "Blacks only," to today seeing fountains that say, "Contaminated water. Do not
drink." And somehow, that's acceptable? The residents in Flint have been forced to drink
with, cook with and bathe with bottled water, while paying the highest water bills in the
country for water that is infected with deadly legionella bacteria. It was natural for me
to go to Flint, because industrial pollution, bacteria-contaminated water were all too
familiar for me growing up in my hometown, Braddock, Pennsylvania, where my mother and I
battled cancer and autoimmune disorders like lupus. Our 14-year collaboration, "The Notion
of Family," was created out of our struggle to survive environmental racism, healthcare
inequity and chemical emissions that were being deregulated and released from the United
States Steel Corporation, making Braddock the town with the highest asthma and infant
mortality rates in the country.

From the Monongahela River to the Flint River, in the words of W.E.B. Du Bois, "The town,
the whole valley, has turned its back upon the river. It has used it as a sewer, as a
drain, as a place for throwing their waste."General Motors has been cited for dumping
chemicals in the Flint River for decades. When my photo essay "Flint is Family" came out
in August of 2016, it was released to remind America that although Flint was no longer
headline news, the water crisis was far from over. And, of course, I knew it was going to
take more than a series of photographs on my part to bring relief to the people in Vehicle
City. Shea and I bonded over our mothers and grandmothers. Amber and I bonded over our
battles with lupus. Together, we decided to remain in each other's life and continue our
creative efforts. In 2017, Shea and Amber cofounded artist collective The Sister Tour,
whose mission is to provide a safe space for Flint artists.

One year later, I mounted my solo exhibition, "Flint is Family," here in New York City at
Gavin Brown's Enterprise on West 127th Street. As the audience approaches the facade of
the building, they see a 30-foot billboard. The 30-foot billboard is made of three large
color negatives with the message "Water Is Life," spelled out in Nestle water bottles by
The Sister Tour. Nestle, the largest water-bottling company in the world, pumps 400
gallons of water per minute out of aquifers in Lake Michigan, nearly free of charge. The
company also extracts millions of liters of water from First Nation reservations, while
they have no access to clean water at all. This is a fundraiser print that I used to raise
money to send The Sister Tour to different venues to educate people on the ongoing crisis.
I also continued to keep it in the public eye by producing countdown flags that were
raised on institutions across the country.

This past June, Amber emailed me with the news that Michigan's attorney general dropped
all criminal charges in the Flint Water Crisis investigation, where eight state and city
employees were facing charges as serious as manslaughter. I could no longer idly stand by
and wait for the government to do its job. Justice has been delayed, and justice has been
denied. It's been five years, and we're still waiting on justice for the men, women and
children in Flint. I asked Amber, "What can I do?" She told me about a man named Moses
West that she met in Puerto Rico, who invented a 26,000-pound atmospheric water generator.
Amber took Moses to elected officials in the city of Flint. None of them seemed interested
in bringing the machine for relief to Flint at all. Amber needed to get the machine from a
military base in Texas all the way to Flint. Nobody in Flint had that kind of money lying
around.

And it was at that point that I decided to take the proceeds from my solo exhibition
"Flint is Family," along with the generous match grant from the Robert Rauschenberg
Foundation, and sent it to Moses West. This past July, Moses West and his atmospheric water
generator arrived to Flint, Michigan, on North Saginaw between Marengo and Pulaski, and is
actually still there right now, operating. This community that sits three miles from
downtown has been stripped of its schools, access to healthy grocery stores and clean
water. Socially, it's viewed as a violent, poor community. But I see something completely
different. Moses, an officer, Ranger, veteran, was very clear about his water rescue
mission: Bring relief of free, clean water to the people in Flint. Teach them how to use
the machine, teach them how to take care of it, and most importantly, take ownership of
the machine. Tell everybody across the city to bring all their containers and come and
take as much water as they can stock up on, especially before the winter season hits; the
machine doesn't extract moisture in freezing temperatures.

This technology pulls air through a high-volume air filter. It mechanically creates
condensation, which produces 2,000 gallons of water per day. Residents are free to walk up
to the machine anywhere between 9am and 8pm daily and take as much as they want,
alleviating them from standing in long lines for bottled water. I've been at the machine,
interviewing people, asking them, "What does it mean to see Moses and his machine in
[your] community?" And, "What has it been like living without access to clean water?"
Alita told me, "It's a miracle that God gave Moses the knowledge and technology to provide
us with pure drinking water." She also told me that prior to the machine coming, she had
severe headaches, and the water made her so sick to her stomach, she couldn't eat. Tina
told me that the lead-contaminated water made her hair fall out. Usually, she's weak and
very light-headed. Since using the machine, she's had energy and strength.

David, he was overwhelmed with joy that someone from Texas cared. When he tasted the
water, he thought to himself, "Now, this is the way God intended water to be." He brings
three seven-gallon containers to refill to use at his barbecue stand. Through creativity
and solidarity, Amber Hasan, Shea Cobb, Tuklor Senegal, The Sister Tour, myself, the
people of Flint, Dexter Moon, Moses West and his atmospheric water generator have been
able to provide 120,000 gallons of free, clean water.

The people in Flint deserve access to clean water. Water is life. It is the spirit that
binds us from sickness, death and destruction. Imagine how many millions of lives we could
save if Moses's machine were in places like Newark, New Jersey, South Africa and India,
with compassion instead of profit motives. I loaded my camera, I locked my focus, and I
placed my finger over the shutter release, as Shea and Zion went to take their first sip
of clean water. When the shutter released, I was overcome with a deep sense of joy and
righteousness. When I sent Shea some of the photographs, she wrote, "Thank you again for
the light that you bring to my city." I immediately replied, "The light was already there
within you."It's been four years since I've been photographing in Flint, and finally, I've
been able to render a poetic justice. No matter how dark a situation may be, a camera can
extract the light and turn a negative into a positive. Thank you.

<!--
ad_duration=3.33
comment_count=22
event="We the Future"
external_start_time=0
has_talk_citation=1
intro_duration=11.82
is_subtitle_required="False"
is_talk_featured="True"
language="en"
language_swap="False"
native_language="en"
number_of_related_talks=6
number_of_speakers=1
number_of_subtitled_videos=16
number_of_tags=5
number_of_talk_download_languages=16
number_of_talk_more_resources=0
number_of_talk_recommendations=1
number_of_talks_take_actions=1
post_ad_duration=0.83
published_timestamp="2019-11-20 15:57:52"
recording_date="2019-09-24"
speaker_description="Visual artist"
speaker_is_published=1
speaker_name="LaToya Ruby Frazier"
talk_more_resources=[]
talk_name="A creative solution for the water crisis in Flint, Michigan"
talk_recommendations_blurb="More resources curated by LaToya Ruby Frazier"
talks_tags=["photography","social-change","water","art","activism"]
url_audio="https://download.ted.com/talks/LaToyaRubyFrazier_2019S.mp3?apikey=acme-roadrunner"
url_photo_speaker="https://pe.tedcdn.com/images/ted/2261334cf53afbaf7e6a9e91f706c6113462b116_254x191.jpg"
url_photo_talk="https://s3.amazonaws.com/talkstar-photos/uploads/4c5323b6-a976-41d6-adbd-5b5f815c96ed/LaToyaRubyFrazier_2019S-embed.jpg"
url_webpage="https://www.ted.com/talks/latoya_ruby_frazier_a_creative_solution_for_the_water_crisis_in_flint_michigan"
video_type_name="TED Stage Talk"
-->