---
title: The mental health benefits of storytelling for health care workers
speaker: Laurel Braitman
description: >-
 Health care workers are under more stress than ever before. How can they protect
 their mental health while handling new and complex pressures? TED Fellow Laurel
 Braitman shows how writing and sharing personal stories helps physicians, nurses,
 medical students and other health professionals connect more meaningfully with
 themselves and others -- and make their emotional well-being a priority.
date: 2019-04-15
tags: ["self","emotions","psychology","mental-health","health","health-care","writing","storytelling","community","communication","ted-fellows"]
slug: laurel_braitman_the_mental_health_benefits_of_storytelling_for_health_care_workers
---

For the last few years, I've been a writer in residence at the Stanford Medical School. I
was hired by an incredible woman, she's a poet and an anesthesiologist, named Audrey
Shafer, and she started the Medicine and the Muse Program to reintroduce humanities back
into medical education and training. My job was to teach writing, storytelling and general
communication skills to physicians, nurses, medical students and other health care
workers. And I thought I'd get a ton of great student essays about dissecting cadavers and
poems about the spleen. And I did. But almost immediately, I started getting more essays
that made me really anxious and really worried. My students were writing about their
crushing anxiety, the unbearable pressure on them to succeed, their mental health
diagnoses, their suicide attempts, how alone and isolated they felt and wondered if they'd
gone into the right profession, and they weren't even doctors yet.

This is my student Uriel Sanchez.

Uriel Sanchez: The choice you are given through medicine, from a lot of your mentors even,
is like, you have to choose, like, being a really good person or a really good
doctor.

Laurel Braitman: Physicians' own humanity and emotional well-being are almost never made a
core part of their training or even acknowledged. And real vulnerability, like sharing
certain mental health diagnoses, for example, can be absolutely career-ending. But nearly
30 percent of American medical students are depressed, and one in 10 have thought about
suicide. And it's actually even worse for practicing physicians. There's really widespread
job dissatisfaction, high rates of depression, and doctors have one of the highest suicide
rates of any profession in the United Sates. This is scary. Not just for them but for us,
too. I really think doctors have the most important job. And if their lives are at stake,
ours are, too. Now, I am absolutely not a mental health professional, I'm a writer, which
most days is absolutely the complete and total opposite. But I can tell you that the more
opportunities that I give health care workers to share their daily frustrations, their
fears, their joys, what surprises them, what they resent, the better they seem to feel. So
at Medicine and the Muse, we offer evening, weekend and day-long storytelling workshops at
farms and other places with really good food.

I invite other journalists, writers, producers, podcasters and poets, and they teach
writing, communication and storytelling skills to our participants. And those participants
practice being vulnerable by sharing their stories out loud with one another. And in doing
so, they reconnect with what drew them to medicine in the first place. These are the
skills they'll draw on when they realize and are confronted with the stressful, messy
reality of the work they've chosen. This is how they realize it's a calling. So I have a
prescription here for you today. It's not from physicians, it's for them, and I asked my
students for help. And before I start, let me just say I work with doctors, but I'm
absolutely convinced that this applies to almost any profession, especially those of us
who are so committed to our work, and it can be so intense and overwhelming, that
sometimes we forget why we chose to do it in the first place. To me, sharing a true
vulnerable story is a lot like raising a flag up a flagpole.

Other people see it, if they agree with it and it resonates with them, they come and stand
under it with you. That's what my student Maite Van Hentenryck did.

Maite Van Hentenryck: I mean, it was super anxiety-inducing, and I shared parts of myself
that I really have probably told five classmates. LB: When Maite was a baby, she had to
have her leg amputated. When she got to medical school, she was taking just a standard
class quiz, and she got asked the question, "Please tell us about the first time you
encountered someone with a disability." She wondered if her supervisors had ever
considered that the person with the disability was her, the doctor. So she talked about it
in front of about 100 of her friends, peers, which is a big deal, because, you know, she's
really shy. And afterwards, what happened, is a number of students with disabilities, that
she didn't know, came up to her and asked her to colead a group on campus that's now
advocating for more visibility and inclusion in medical training. In English, we tend to
call people creatives if they have a certain job. Like, designer or architect or artist. I
hate that term.

I think it's offensive and exclusionary. Creativity doesn't belong to a certain group of
people. A lot of my work with physicians and medical students is just reminding them that
no matter what profession we choose, we can make meaning, find beauty in the hard stuff
and create. This is medical student Pablo Romano.

Pablo Romano: My parents immigrated here from Mexico many years ago, and when I was in
college, they passed away. I was 18 when my dad died and then 20 when my mom died. LB: Not
only has Pablo been talking publicly for the first time about being an orphan, but
together, we started a live storytelling series we're calling Talk Rx, and it's become a
really popular place for his peers to show their most vulnerable and powerful thoughts and
feelings.

PR: I go to a school that cares so much about data and research and numbers. At the end of
the day, what moves people is stories. LB: Arifeen Rahman is a second-year medical student.
And before she was born, her parents immigrated from Bangladesh to the United States. She
grew up in a really beautiful home in Northern California, very safe and stable, her
parents are still together, she never went hungry, and she graduated from
Harvard.

Arifeen Rahman: I didn't feel like the stories I had were worth telling or that they
mattered. LB: Arifeen did have stories, though. Recently, she gave a talk about being maybe
the only Bangladeshi American girl to win an essay contest from the Daughters of the
American Revolution â€”

and then dress up for Halloween as the Declaration of Independence. And I love Arifeen's
story so much, because to me it represents all that is good and bad and hard and
exhausting about representing the new American dream.

AR: The hardest thing was coming up against that voice that was telling me no one wants to
hear my stories, like, why invest the time in this thing that doesn't really mean anything
in the grand scale of life. Maybe the biggest thing is, like, maybe it does. LB: Life is so
short. For me, the only thing, really, that matters with my time here is feeling like I
can connect with other people and maybe make them feel slightly less alone. And in my
experience, that's what stories do absolutely the best. So, my student and a collaborator
in a lot of these endeavors is Candice Kim. She's an MD-PhD student in medical education.
She's written about #MeToo in medicine, navigating her queer identity in a conservative
field and her mom's metastatic cancer diagnosis. And recently, she started also doing some
really interesting research about our work.

Candace Kim: We've seen that students who participate in our storytelling opportunity show
between a 36 and 51 percent decrease in distress. LB: If this was a mental health drug, it
would be an absolute blockbuster. Results seem to last up to a month. It might be longer,
a month is just when Candice stopped measuring. So we don't even know. Not only that, but
100 percent of our participants recommend these opportunities to a friend. For me, though,
the most important thing that our work has done is create a culture of vulnerability in a
place [where] there was absolutely none before. I think what this does is that it allows
doctors and other folks an opportunity to envision a different kind of future for
themselves and their patients. This is Maite again.

MVH: I want to be the doctor that remembers when your birthday is without having to look
at the chart. And I want to be the doctor who knows what my patient's favorite color is
and what TV shows they like to watch. I want to be the doctor that's remembered for
listening to people and making sure I take care of all of them and not just treating their
disease. LB: Being human is a terminal condition. We all have it, and we are all going to
die. Helping health care professionals communicate more meaningfully with each other, with
their patients and with themselves is certainly not going to magically change everything
that is wrong with the contemporary health care system, and it's not going to live to the
immense burdens we place on our physicians, but it is absolutely key in making sure that
our healers are healthy enough to heal the rest of us. Communicating with each other with
vulnerability, listening with compassion, is, I believe, the absolute best medicine that
we have. Thank you.

<!--
ad_duration=3.33
comment_count=6
event="TED2019"
external_duration=0
external_start_time=0
has_talk_citation=0
intro_duration=11.82
is_subtitle_required="False"
is_talk_featured="True"
language="en"
language_swap="False"
native_language="en"
number_of_related_talks=6
number_of_speakers=1
number_of_subtitled_videos=9
number_of_tags=11
number_of_talk_download_languages=9
number_of_talk_more_resources=0
number_of_talk_recommendations=0
number_of_talks_take_actions=3
post_ad_duration=0.83
published_timestamp="2020-05-05 19:47:19"
recording_date="2019-04-15"
speaker_description="Writer"
speaker_is_published=1
speaker_name="Laurel Braitman"
talk_more_resources=[]
talk_name="The mental health benefits of storytelling for health care workers"
talks_tags=["self","emotions","psychology","mental-health","health","health-care","writing","storytelling","community","communication","ted-fellows"]
url_audio="https://download.ted.com/talks/LaurelBraitman_2019U.mp3?apikey=acme-roadrunner"
url_photo_speaker="https://pe.tedcdn.com/images/ted/3c9d292b5c8ee7e3809a06cb78038f680260a876_254x191.jpg"
url_photo_talk="https://s3.amazonaws.com/talkstar-photos/uploads/901dabd4-6738-43cb-acec-4aa47afadc65/LaurelBraitman_2019U-embed.jpg"
url_webpage="https://www.ted.com/talks/laurel_braitman_the_mental_health_benefits_of_storytelling_for_health_care_workers"
video_type_name="TED Stage Talk"
-->