---
title: Inside an Antarctic time machine
speaker: Lee Hotz
description: >-
 Science columnist Lee Hotz describes a remarkable project at WAIS Divide,
 Antarctica, where a hardy team are drilling into ten-thousand-year-old ice to
 extract vital data on our changing climate.
date: 2010-07-14
tags: ["climate-change","news","science","antarctica"]
slug: lee_hotz_inside_an_antarctic_time_machine
---

Come with me to the bottom of the world, Antarctica, the highest, driest, windiest, and
yes, coldest region on Earth — more arid than the Sahara and, in parts, colder than Mars.
The ice of Antarctica glows with a light so dazzling, it blinds the unprotected eye. Early
explorers rubbed cocaine in their eyes to kill the pain of it. The weight of the ice is
such that the entire continent sags below sea level, beneath its weight. Yet, the ice of
Antarctica is a calendar of climate change. It records the annual rise and fall of
greenhouse gases and temperatures going back before the onset of the last ice ages.
Nowhere on Earth offers us such a perfect record. And here, scientists are drilling into
the past of our planet to find clues to the future of climate change. This past January, I
traveled to a place called WAIS Divide, about 600 miles from the South Pole. It is the
best place on the planet, many say, to study the history of climate change.

There, about 45 scientists from the University of Wisconsin, the Desert Research Institute
in Nevada and others have been working to answer a central question about global warming.
What is the exact relationship between levels of greenhouse gases and planetary
temperatures? It's urgent work. We know that temperatures are rising. This past May was
the warmest worldwide on record. And we know that levels of greenhouse gases are rising
too. What we don't know is the exact, precise, immediate impact of these changes on
natural climate patterns — winds, ocean currents, precipitation rates, cloud formation,
things that bear on the health and well-being of billions of people. Their entire camp,
every item of gear, was ferried 885 miles from McMurdo Station, the main U.S. supply base
on the coast of Antarctica. WAIS Divide itself though, is a circle of tents in the snow.
In blizzard winds, the crew sling ropes between the tents so that people can feel their
way safely to the nearest ice house and to the nearest outhouse.

It snows so heavily there, the installation was almost immediately buried. Indeed, the
researchers picked this site because ice and snow accumulates here 10 times faster than
anywhere else in Antarctica. They have to dig themselves out every day. It makes for an
exotic and chilly commute.

But under the surface is a hive of industrial activity centered around an
eight-million-dollar drill assembly. Periodically, this drill, like a biopsy needle,
plunges thousands of feet deep into the ice to extract a marrow of gases and isotopes for
analysis. Ten times a day, they extract the 10-foot long cylinder of compressed ice
crystals that contain the unsullied air and trace chemicals laid down by snow, season
after season for thousands of years. It's really a time machine. At the peak of activity
earlier this year, the researchers lowered the drill an extra hundred feet deeper into the
ice every day and another 365 years deeper into the past. Periodically, they remove a
cylinder of ice, like gamekeepers popping a spent shotgun shell from the barrel of a
drill. They inspect it, they check it for cracks, for drill damage, for spalls, for
chips. More importantly, they prepare it for inspection and analysis by 27 independent
laboratories in the United States and Europe, who will examine it for 40 different trace
chemicals related to climate, some in parts per quadrillion.

Yes, I said that with a Q, quadrillion. They cut the cylinders up into three-foot sections
for easier handling and shipment back to these labs, some 8,000 miles from the drill site.
Each cylinder is a parfait of time. This ice formed as snow 15,800 years ago, when our
ancestors were daubing themselves with paint and considering the radical new technology of
the alphabet. Bathed in polarized light and cut in cross-section, this ancient ice reveals
itself as a mosaic of colors, each one showing how conditions at depth in the ice have
affected this material at depths where pressures can reach a ton per square inch. Every
year, it begins with a snowflake, and by digging into fresh snow, we can see how this
process is ongoing today. This wall of undisturbed snow, back-lit by sunlight, shows the
striations of winter and summer snow, layer upon layer. Each storm scours the atmosphere,
washing out dust, soot, trace chemicals, and depositing them on the snow pack year after
year, millennia after millennia, creating a kind of periodic table of elements that at
this point is more than 11,000 feet thick.

From this, we can detect an extraordinary number of things. We can see the calcium from
the world's deserts, soot from distant wildfires, methane as an indicator of the strength
of a Pacific monsoon, all wafted on winds from warmer latitudes to this remote and very
cold place. Most importantly, these cylinders and this snow trap air. Each cylinder is
about 10 percent ancient air, a pristine time capsule of greenhouse gases — carbon
dioxide, methane, nitrous oxide — all unchanged from the day that snow formed and first
fell. And this is the object of their scrutiny. But don't we already know what we need to
know about greenhouse gases? Why do we need to study this anymore? Don't we already know
how they affect temperatures? Don't we already know the consequences of a changing climate
on our settled civilization? The truth is, we only know the outlines, and what we don't
completely understand, we can't properly fix.

Indeed, we run the risk of making things worse. Consider, the single most successful
international environmental effort of the 20th century, the Montreal Protocol, in which
the nations of Earth banded together to protect the planet from the harmful effects of
ozone-destroying chemicals used at that time in air conditioners, refrigerators and other
cooling devices. We banned those chemicals, and we replaced them, unknowingly, with other
substances that, molecule per molecule, are a hundred times more potent as heat-trapping,
greenhouse gases than carbon dioxide. This process requires extraordinary precautions. The
scientists must insure that the ice is not contaminated. Moreover, in this 8,000-mile
journey, they have to insure this ice doesn't melt. Imagine juggling a snowball across the
tropics. They have to, in fact, make sure this ice never gets warmer than about 20 degrees
below zero, otherwise, the key gases inside it will dissipate.

So, in the coldest place on Earth, they work inside a refrigerator. As they handle the
ice, in fact, they keep an extra pair of gloves warming in an oven, so that, when their
work gloves freeze and their fingers stiffen, they can don a fresh pair. They work against
the clock and against the thermometer. So far, they've packed up about 4,500 feet of ice
cores for shipment back to the United States. This past season, they manhandled them
across the ice to waiting aircraft. The 109th Air National Guard flew the most recent
shipment of ice back to the coast of Antarctica, where it was boarded onto a freighter,
shipped across the tropics to California, unloaded, put on a truck, driven across the
desert to the National Ice Core Laboratory in Denver, Colorado, where, as we speak,
scientists are now slicing this material up for samples, for analysis, to be distributed
to the laboratories around the country and in Europe. Antarctica was this planet's last
empty quarter — the blind spot in our expanding vision of the world.

Early explorers sailed off the edge of the map, and they found a place where the normal
rules of time and temperature seem suspended. Here, the ice seems a living presence. The
wind that rubs against it gives it voice. It is a voice of experience. It is a voice we
should heed. Thank you.

<!--
ad_duration=3.33
event="TEDGlobal 2010"
external_start_time=0
intro_duration=11.82
is_subtitle_required="False"
is_talk_featured="True"
language="en"
language_swap="False"
native_language="en"
number_of_related_talks=6
number_of_speakers=1
number_of_subtitled_videos=28
number_of_tags=4
number_of_talk_download_languages=28
number_of_talk_more_resources=0
number_of_talk_recommendations=0
number_of_talks_take_actions=0
post_ad_duration=0.83
published_timestamp="2010-08-24 08:45:00"
recording_date="2010-07-14"
speaker_description="Journalist"
speaker_is_published=1
speaker_name="Lee Hotz"
talk_name="Inside an Antarctic time machine"
talks_tags=["climate-change","news","science","antarctica"]
url_audio="https://download.ted.com/talks/LeeHotz_2010G.mp3?apikey=acme-roadrunner"
url_photo_speaker="https://pe.tedcdn.com/images/ted/193314_254x191.jpg"
url_photo_talk="https://pe.tedcdn.com/images/ted/193313_800x600.jpg"
url_webpage="https://www.ted.com/talks/lee_hotz_inside_an_antarctic_time_machine"
video_type_name="TED Stage Talk"
-->