---
title: The urgent case for antibiotic-free animals
speaker: Leon Marchal
description: >-
 The UN predicts that antimicrobial resistance will be our biggest killer by 2050.
 "That should really scare the hell out of all of us," says bioprocess engineer
 Leon Marchal. He's working on an urgently needed solution: transforming the
 massive, global animal feed industry. Learn why the overuse of antibiotics in
 animal products, from livestock feed to everyday pet treats, has skyrocketed
 worldwide -- and how we can take common-sense measures to stave off a potential
 epidemic.
date: 2019-09-12
tags: ["health","disease","medicine","microbes","public-health","global-issues","epidemiology"]
slug: leon_marchal_the_urgent_case_for_antibiotic_free_animals
---

There was a time when simple infections were deadly, but now, thanks to the wide
availability of antibiotics, this is merely a relic of the past. But actually, I should
say "was," because nowadays, we're using antibiotics so much that the bacteria that cause
these infections are becoming resistant. And that should really scare the hell out of all
of us. If we do not change our behavior and wean ourselves off antibiotics, the UN predicts
that by 2050, antimicrobial resistance will become our single biggest killer. So we must
start to act. But "where to begin" is an interesting question, because we humans are not
the only ones using antibiotics. Worldwide, 50 to 80 percent of all antibiotics are used
by animals. Not all of these are critical for human health, but if we do not get it under
control right now, we're looking at a very scary future for humans and animals alike. To
begin, let's talk about how we ended up here.

The first large-scale use of antibiotics was in the early '50s of the last century. In the
Western world, prosperity was increasing and people wanted to eat more animal protein.
When animals were sick, you could now treat them with antibiotics so they did not die and
kept growing. But soon, it was discovered that adding small and regular amounts of
antibiotics to the feed kept the animals healthy, made them grow faster and caused them to
need less feed. So these antibiotics worked well — really well, actually. And with
increasing animal production, also antibiotic use skyrocketed worldwide. Unfortunately, so
did antibiotic resistance. The reason your doctor tells you to finish the entire bottle of
antibiotics is if you shorten your dose, you will not kill all of the bugs. And the ones
that stick around build up the antibiotic resistance. It's the same problem with giving
animals small and regular doses of antibiotics: some bad bugs die but not all of
them.

Spread that across an entire industry, and you can understand that we accidentally build
up a large reservoir of antibiotic-resistant bacteria. But I hate to break it to you — the
problem doesn't stop there. You know who else takes antibiotics? Fluffy, your cat, and
Rover, your dog.

Pets rank even amongst the heaviest users of all, and they use antibiotics that are much
more critical for human health. Combine this with how close we live with our companion
animals and you understand the risk of you picking up antibiotic-resistant bacteria from
your own pet. But how do these antibiotic-resistant bacteria in farm animals affect you?
Let me give you an example we have, actually, data on. The levels of antibiotic-resistant
salmonella in pigs in Europe against different types of antibiotics range from less than a
percent to as high [as] 60 percent. Which means that in most cases, this antibiotic will
not work anymore to kill this salmonella. And there was a high correlation between
antibiotic-resistant salmonella in the pig and in the final product. Whether that is pork
chop, spare ribs or minced meat. Now, luckily, typically less than one percent of all raw
meat, fish or eggs will contain salmonella. And this only poses a risk when not treated
well.

Still, there are over 100,000 human salmonella cases in the EU and more than a million
cases in the US. In the US, leading to 23,000 hospitalizations and 450 people dead each
year. With antibiotic-resistant salmonella on the rise, this death toll is likely to
increase. But it's not only about consuming yourself. This year, more than 100 people got
infected with a multidrug-resistant salmonella after feeding pig ears, as a treat, to
their dog. So we really must cut back on antibiotic use in animal production. And luckily,
this is starting to happen. The EU was the first region to ban putting antibiotics in low
doses in the feed. From '99 on, in several steps, the amount of different types of
antibiotics allowed was reduced, and in 2006, a complete ban went into place. Antibiotics
were only allowed when a veterinarian determined the animal was sick. Sounds great, right?
Problem solved. No, wait, not so fast.

As soon as the reduction program started, it was very quickly discovered that antibiotics
had been the perfect blanket to cover up a lot of bad farm practices. More and more
animals became sick and needed to be cured with ... antibiotics. So instead of the total
amount going down, it actually increased. Surely, that was not the way to go. But luckily,
that was not the end of the story. The whole European agricultural sector started on a
journey, and I think it's a journey anybody can learn from. This is also the time I
personally entered the scene. I joined a large European feed compounder. A feed compounder
makes a total diet for a farmer to feed to his animals and often also provides the advice
on how to raise the animals in the best way. I was really motivated to work together with
my colleagues, veterinarians and, of course, the farmers to figure out how to keep the
animals healthy and antibiotic-free. Now there are three major things that need to happen
for antibiotic-free production.

Let me walk you through the playbook. To start — and it sounds very obvious — that our
hygiene is the place to start. Better cleaning of the stable and the drinking-water lines
making it harder for the disease to come in and spread across the stable. That's all very
important, but the part I was personally most interested in was better feeding for the
animals, better nutrition. Feeding a well-balanced diet is important. Think about it this
way: when you yourself do not eat enough fiber, you do not feel well. Part of the food you
consume is not digested by yourself but fermented in your large intestine by bacteria. So
you're feeding those microbes with part of your diet. Initially, most young animals were
fed low-fiber, high-starch and protein, very finely ground and highly digestible diets.
Like being yourself on a diet of hamburger buns, rice, waffles and protein bars. We
changed this to a lower-protein, higher-fiber, coarser type of diet.

Like being on a diet of whole grains, salad with meat or beans. This shifted the bacterial
flora in the animals' guts to the more beneficial ones and reduced the chance that
pathogens would flourish. You might be surprised but not only diet composition, also diet
structure plays a role. Simply the fact that the same diet is coarser will lead to a
better-developed digestive tract, and thus, a healthier animal. But the best part was that
farmers started to buy this actually, too. Unlike some other parts of the world, Western
European farmers mainly still make their independent buying decisions: who to buy the feed
from and sell their animals to. So what you're actually selling in the end reflects the
actual local need of these farmers. For example, the protein content in piglet diets in
countries that are much more vigilant in reducing antibiotics, like, for example, Germany
and the Netherlands, were already 10 to 15 percent lower than in a country like the UK,
which was slower to pick this up. But, like with better hygiene, better nutrition helps but
will not totally prevent you from becoming sick.

So more is needed. And that's why we turned to the microbiome. Making the water with the
feed more acidic helps to create an environment that benefits the more beneficial bacteria
and inhibits the pathogens. Like fermented food, whether it's yogurt, sauerkraut or
salami, they'll all spoil less quickly, too. Now, with modern techniques, like the ones
based on DNA testing, we can see that there are many more different microorganisms
present. And this ecosystem, which we call the microbiome, is much more complex. Turns out
there are about eight times more microorganisms in your gut as tissue cells in your body.
And for animals, the impact is no less. So if we want to work without antibiotics in
animal production, we have to make the animals much more robust. So that when a disease
strikes, the animals are much more resilient. And this three-pronged nutribiosis approach
involving the host, nutrition and the microbiome is the way to do it. Now the practice of
raising animals on an antibiotic-containing or antibiotic-use-provoking diet is a bit
cheaper at farm level.

But in the end, we are talking about a few percent at the consumer level. That's actually
quite affordable for the middle- and high-income part of the world population. And a very
small price to pay when our own health or our loved ones' health is at stake. So what do
you think, what direction do we take? Do we allow antimicrobial resistance to become our
biggest killer, at huge financial and a special personal cost? Or do we, besides reducing
human antibiotic consumption, truly start embracing antibiotic-free animal production? For
me, the choice is very obvious. But to make this happen, we have to set reduction targets
and make sure that they're followed all around the world. Because farmers compete with
each other. And at a country level, trading block or the global market, costs are very
important. And also, we have to be realistic. Farmers need to have the possibilities to
invest more in better management and better feed in order to achieve this
reduction.

And besides legal limits, the market can play a role, by offering antibiotic-reduced or
antibiotic-free products. And with growing consumer awareness, these market forces will
increase in power. Now everything I've been talking about seems to be great for us. But
what about the animals? Now, guess what, their lives get better, too. Better health, less
stress, happier life. So now you know. We have the knowledge how to produce meat, eggs and
milk without or with very low amounts of antibiotics, and I'll argue it's a small price to
pay to avoid a future in which bacterial infections again become our biggest killer. Thank
you.

<!--
ad_duration=3.33
comment_count=5
event="TED@DuPont"
external_start_time=0
has_talk_citation=1
intro_duration=11.82
is_subtitle_required="False"
is_talk_featured="True"
language="en"
language_swap="False"
native_language="en"
number_of_related_talks=6
number_of_speakers=1
number_of_subtitled_videos=14
number_of_tags=7
number_of_talk_download_languages=14
number_of_talk_more_resources=0
number_of_talk_recommendations=0
number_of_talks_take_actions=1
post_ad_duration=0.83
published_timestamp="2020-01-07 16:00:08"
recording_date="2019-09-12"
speaker_description="Bioprocess engineer"
speaker_is_published=1
speaker_name="Leon Marchal"
talk_more_resources=[]
talk_name="The urgent case for antibiotic-free animals"
talks_tags=["health","disease","medicine","microbes","public-health","global-issues","epidemiology"]
url_audio="https://download.ted.com/talks/LeonMarchal_2019S.mp3?apikey=acme-roadrunner"
url_photo_speaker="https://pe.tedcdn.com/images/ted/b9bd6fbdb1d852cb9e2a5fed64dba67d34deca07_254x191.jpg"
url_photo_talk="https://s3.amazonaws.com/talkstar-photos/uploads/c1a1bbc8-576c-4360-9028-9b1ab94ad949/LeonMarchel_2019S-embed.jpg"
url_webpage="https://www.ted.com/talks/leon_marchal_the_urgent_case_for_antibiotic_free_animals"
video_type_name="TED Institute Talk"
-->