---
title: A history of Indigenous languages -- and how to revitalize them
speaker: Lindsay Morcom
description: >-
 Indigenous languages across North America are under threat of extinction due to
 the colonial legacy of cultural erasure, says linguist Lindsay Morcom. Highlighting
 grassroots strategies developed by the Anishinaabe people of Canada to revive
 their language and community, Morcom makes a passionate case for enacting
 policies that could protect Indigenous heritage for generations to come.
date: 2019-02-03
tags: ["language","history","culture","policy","indigenous-peoples","education","tedx"]
slug: lindsay_morcom_a_history_of_indigenous_languages_and_how_to_revitalize_them
---

Dene elder Paul Disain said, "Our language and culture is the window through which we see
the world." And on Turtle Island, what is now known as North America, there're so many
unique and wonderful ways to see the world. As a person of Indigenous heritage, I'm
interested in learning Anishinaabemowin, which is my heritage language, because it lets me
see the world through that window. It lets me connect with my family, my ancestors, my
community, my culture. And lets me think about how I can pass that on to future
generations. As a linguist, I'm interested in how language functions generally. I can look
at phonetics and phonology â€” speech sounds. I can look at morphology, or the structure of
words. I can look at syntax, which is the structure of sentences and phrases, to learn
about how humans store language in our brains and how we use it to communicate with one
another. For example, Anishinaabemowin, like most Indigenous languages, is what's called
polysynthetic, which means that there are very, very long words, composed of little tiny
pieces called morphemes.

So I can say, in Anishinaabemowin, "niwiisin," "I eat," which is one word. I can say
"nimino-wiisin," "I eat well," which is still one word. I can say "nimino-naawakwe-wiisin,"
"I eat a good lunch," which is how many words in English? Five words in English, a single
word in Anishinaabemowin. Now, I've got a bit of a quiz for you. In a one-word answer, what
color is that slide? Audience: Green. Lindsay Morcom: What color is that slide? Audience:
Green. LM: What color is that slide? Audience: Blue. LM: And what color is that
slide?(Audience murmurs)Not trick questions, I promise. For you as English speakers, you
saw two green slides and two blue slides. But the way that we categorize colors varies
across languages, so if you had been Russian speakers, you would have seen two slides that
were different shades of green, one that was "goluboy," which is light blue, one that is
"siniy," dark blue. And those are seen as different colors.

If you were speakers of Anishinaabemowin, you would have seen slides that were
Ozhaawashkwaa or Ozhaawashkozi, which means either green or blue. It's not that speakers
don't see the colors, it's that the way they categorize them and the way that they
understand shades is different. At the same time, there are universals in the ways that
humans categorize color, and that tells us about how human brains understand and express
what they're seeing. Anishinaabemowin does another wonderful thing, which is animate,
inanimate marking on all words. So it's not unlike how French and Spanish mark all words
as either masculine or feminine. Anishinaabemowin and other Algonquian languages mark all
words as either animate or inanimate. The things that you would think to be animate are
animate, things that have a pulse: people, animals, growing plants. But there are other
things that are animate that you might not guess, like rocks.

Rocks are marked as animate, and that tells us really interesting things about grammar,
and it also tells us really interesting things about how Anishinaabemowin speakers relate
to and understand the world around them. Now, the sad part of that is that Indigenous
languages are in danger. Indigenous languages that posses so much knowledge of culture, of
history, of ways to relate to one another, of ways to relate to our environment. Having
been on this land since time immemorial, these languages have developed here and they
contain priceless environmental knowledge that helps us relate well to the land on which
we live. But they are, in fact, in danger. The vast majority of Indigenous languages in
North America are considered endangered, and those that are not endangered are vulnerable.
That is by design. In our laws, in our policies, in our houses of governance, there have
been stated attempts to eliminate Indigenous languages and cultures in this
country.

Duncan Campbell Scott was one of the architects of the residential school system. On
tabling a bill that required mandatory residential school attendance for Indigenous
children in 1920, he said, "I want to get rid of the Indian problem. Our objective is to
continue until there is not a single Indian in Canada that has not been absorbed into the
body politic and there is no Indian question, and no Indian Department; that is the whole
object of this Bill."The atrocities that occurred in residential schools were documented.
In 1907, P.H. Bryce, who was a doctor and an expert in tuberculosis, published a report
that found that in some schools, 25 percent of children had died from tuberculosis
epidemics created by the conditions in the schools. In other schools, up to 75 percent of
children had died. He was defunded by federal government for his findings, forced into
retirement in 1921, and in 1922, published his findings widely. And through that time,
Indigenous children were taken from their homes, taken from their communities and forced
into church-run residential schools where they suffered, in many cases, serious emotional,
physical and sexual abuse, and in all cases, cultural abuse, as these schools were
designed to eliminate Indigenous language and culture.

The last residential school closed in 1996. Until that time, 150,000 children or more
attended residential schools at 139 institutions across the country. In 2007, the Indian
Residential School Settlement Agreement came into effect. It's the largest class action
lawsuit in Canadian history. It set aside 60 million dollars for the establishment of the
Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada. The TRC gifted us with the ability to hear
survivor stories, to hear impacts on communities and families and to gain access to
research that explored the full effect of residential schools on Indigenous communities
and on Canada as a whole. The TRC found that residential schools constituted what's called
cultural genocide. They state that, "Physical genocide is the mass killing of the members
of a targeted group, biological genocide is the destruction of that group's reproductive
capacity. And cultural genocide is the destruction of those structures and practices that
allow the group to continue as a group." The stated goals of Duncan Campbell
Scott.

So they find that it's cultural genocide, although as children's author and a great
speaker David Bouchard points out, when you build a building, and you build a cemetery
next to that building, because you know the people going into that building are going to
die, what do you call that? The TRC also gifted us with 94 calls to action, beacons that
can lead the way forward as we work to reconciliation. Several of those pertain directly
to language and culture. The TRC calls us to ensure adequate, funded education, including
language and culture. To acknowledge Indigenous rights, including language rights. To
create an Aboriginal Languages Act aimed at acknowledging and preserving Indigenous
languages, with attached funding. To create a position for an Aboriginal Languages
Commissioner and to develop postsecondary language programs as well as to reclaim place
names that have been changed through the course of colonization. At the same time as the
Indian Residential School Settlement Agreement came into effect, the United Nations
adopted the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous People in
2007.

It states that Indigenous people have the right to establish and control their own
education systems and institutions providing education in their own languages, in a manner
appropriate to their cultural methods of teaching and learning. In 2007, when that was
brought into effect, four countries voted against it. They were the United States, New
Zealand, Australia and Canada. Canada adopted the United Nations Declaration on the Rights
of Indigenous People in 2010. And in 2015, the government promised to bring it into
effect. So how are we collectively going to respond? Here's the situation that we're in. Of
the 60 currently spoken Indigenous languages in Canada, all but six are considered
endangered by the United Nations. So, the six that aren't are Cree, Anishinaabemowin,
Stoney, Mi'kmaq, Dene and Inuktitut. And that sounds really dire. But if you go on to the
Atlas of the World's Languages in Danger through the UNESCO website, you'll see a little
"r" right next to that language right there.

That language is Mi'kmaq. Mi'kmaq has undergone significant revitalization because of the
adoption of a self-government agreement that led to culture and language-based education,
and now there are Mi'kmaq children who have Mi'kmaq as their first language. There's so
much that we can do. These children are students in the Mnidoo Mnising Anishinabek
Kinoomaage, an immersion school on Manitoulin island, where they learn in
Anishinaabemowin. They arrived at school in junior kindergarten speaking very little, if
any, Anishinaabemowin. And now, in grade three and grade four, they're testing at
intermediate and fluent levels. At the same time, they have beautifully high self-esteem.
They are proud to be Anishinaabe people, and they have strong learning skills. Not all
education has to be formal education either. In our local community, we have the Kingston
Indigenous Language Nest. KILN is an organization now, but it started six years ago with
passionate community members gathered around an elder's kitchen table.

Since then, we have created weekend learning experiences aimed at multigenerational
learning, where we focus on passing language and culture on to children. We use
traditional games, songs, foods and activities to do that. We have classes at both the
beginner and intermediate levels offered right here. We've partnered with school boards
and libraries to have resources and language in place in formal education. The
possibilities are just endless, and I'm so grateful for the work that has been done to
allow me to pass language and culture on to my son and to other children within our
community. We've developed a strong, beautiful, vibrant community as well, as a result of
this shared effort. So what do we need moving forward? First of all, we need policy. We
need enacted policy with attached funding that will ensure that Indigenous language is
incorporated meaningfully into education, both on and off reserve.

On reserve, education is funded at significantly lower levels than it is off reserve. And
off reserve, Indigenous language education is often neglected, because people assume that
Indigenous people are not present in provincial schools, when actually, around 70 percent
of Indigenous people in Canada today live off reserve. Those children have equal right to
access their language and culture. Beyond policy, we need support. And that doesn't just
mean financial support. We need space where we can carry out activities, classes and
interaction with nonindigenous populations as well. We need support that looks like people
wanting to learn the language. We need support where people talk about why these languages
are important. And to achieve that, we need education. We need access to immersion
education primarily, as that is most certainly the most effective way to ensure the
transmission of Indigenous languages.

But we also need education in provincial schools, we need education for the nonindigenous
populations so that we can come to a better mutual understanding and move forward in a
better way together. I have this quote hanging in a framed picture on my office wall. It
was a gift from a settler ally student that I taught a few years ago, and it reminds me
every day that we can achieve great things if we work together. But if we're going to talk
about reconciliation, we need to acknowledge that a reconciliation that does not result in
the survivance and continuation of Indigenous languages and cultures is no reconciliation
at all. It is assimilation, and it shouldn't be acceptable to any of us. But what we can
do is look to the calls to action, we can look to the United Nations Declaration on the
Rights of Indigenous People and we can come to a mutual understanding that what we have,
in terms of linguistic and cultural heritage for Indigenous people in this country, is
worth saving.

Based on that, we can step forward, together, to ensure that Indigenous languages are
passed on beyond 2050, beyond the next generation, into the next seven
generations. Miigwech. Niawenâ€™kÃ³:wa. Thank you.

<!--
ad_duration=3.33
comment_count=9
event="TEDxQueensU"
has_talk_citation=1
intro_duration=11.82
is_subtitle_required="False"
is_talk_featured="True"
language="en"
language_swap="False"
native_language="en"
number_of_related_talks=6
number_of_speakers=1
number_of_subtitled_videos=13
number_of_tags=7
number_of_talk_download_languages=13
number_of_talk_more_resources=0
number_of_talk_recommendations=1
number_of_talks_take_actions=0
post_ad_duration=0.83
published_timestamp="2020-04-07 20:17:14"
recording_date="2019-02-03"
speaker_description="Interdisciplinary researcher"
speaker_is_published=1
speaker_name="Lindsay Morcom"
talk_more_resources=[]
talk_name="A history of Indigenous languages -- and how to revitalize them"
talk_recommendations_blurb="More resources curated by Lindsay Morcom"
talks_tags=["language","history","culture","policy","indigenous-peoples","education","tedx"]
talks_take_action=[]
url_audio="https://download.ted.com/talks/LindsayMorcom_2019X.mp3?apikey=acme-roadrunner"
url_photo_speaker="https://pe.tedcdn.com/images/ted/f802de98ce2863acce558eacad046408ee1d2f9a_254x191.jpg"
url_photo_talk="https://s3.amazonaws.com/talkstar-photos/uploads/3f0c76cc-cbdb-4d21-9422-dddf9d989874/LindsayMorcom_2019X-embed.jpg"
url_webpage="https://www.ted.com/talks/lindsay_morcom_a_history_of_indigenous_languages_and_how_to_revitalize_them"
video_type_name="TEDx Talk"
-->