---
title: How menopause affects the brain
speaker: Lisa Mosconi
description: >-
 Many of the symptoms of menopause -- hot flashes, night sweats, insomnia, memory
 lapses, depression and anxiety -- start in the brain. How exactly does menopause
 impact cognitive health? Sharing groundbreaking findings from her research,
 neuroscientist Lisa Mosconi reveals how decreasing hormonal levels affect brain
 aging -- and shares simple lifestyle changes you can make to support lifelong
 brain health.
date: 2019-12-04
tags: ["science","brain","women","health","neuroscience","medical-research","human-body","biology"]
slug: lisa_mosconi_how_menopause_affects_the_brain
---

Women are works of art. On the outside as on the inside. I am a neuroscientist, and I
focus on the inside, especially on women's brains. There are many theories on how women's
brains differ from men's brains, and I've been looking at brains for 20 years and can
guarantee that there is no such thing as a gendered brain. Pink and blue, Barbie and Lego,
those are all inventions that have nothing to do with the way our brains are built. That
said, women's brains differ from men's brains in some respects. And I'm here to talk about
these differences, because they actually matter for our health. For example, women are
more likely than men to be diagnosed with an anxiety disorder or depression, not to
mention headaches and migraines. But also, at the core of my research, women are more
likely than men to have Alzheimer's disease. Alzheimer's disease is the most common cause
of dementia on the planet, affecting close to six million people in the United States
alone.

But almost two thirds of all those people are actually women. So for every man suffering
from Alzheimer's there are two women. So why is that overall? Is it age? Is it lifespan?
What else could it be? A few years ago, I launched the Women's Brain Initiative at Weill
Cornell Medicine in New York City, exactly to answer those questions. And tonight, I'm
here with some answers. So it turns out our brains age differently, and menopause plays a
key role here for women. Now most people think of the brain as a kind of black box,
isolated from the rest of the body. But in reality, our brains are in constant interaction
with the rest of us. And perhaps surprisingly, the interactions with the reproductive
system are crucial for brain aging in women. These interactions are mediated by our
hormones. And we know that hormones differ between the genders. Men have more testosterone,
women have more estrogens. But what really matters here is that these hormones differ in
their longevity.

Men's testosterone doesn't run out until late in life, which is a slow and pretty much
symptom-free process, of course.

Women's estrogens, on the other hand, start fading in midlife, during menopause, which is
anything but symptom-free. We associate menopause with the ovaries, but when women say
that they're having hot flashes, night sweats, insomnia, memory lapses, depression,
anxiety, those symptoms don't start in the ovaries. They start in the brain. Those are
neurological symptoms. We're just not used to thinking about them as such. So why is that?
Why are our brains impacted by menopause? Well, first of all, our brains and ovaries are
part of the neuroendocrine system. As part of the system, the brain talks to the ovaries
and the ovaries talk back to the brain, every day of our lives as women. So the health of
the ovaries is linked to the health of the brain. And the other way around. At the same
time, hormones like estrogen are not only involved in reproduction, but also in brain
function. And estrogen in particular, or estradiol, is really key for energy production in
the brain. At the cellular level, estrogen literally pushes neurons to burn glucose to make
energy.

If your estrogen is high, your brain energy is high. When your estrogen declines though,
your neurons start slowing down and age faster. And studies have shown that this process
can even lead to the formation of amyloid plaques, or Alzheimer's plaques, which are a
hallmark of Alzheimer's disease. These effects are stronger in specific brain regions,
starting with the hypothalamus, which is in charge of regulating body temperature. When
estrogen doesn't activate the hypothalamus correctly, the brain cannot regulate body
temperature correctly. So those hot flashes that women get, that's the hypothalamus. Then
there's the brain stem, in charge of sleep and wake. When estrogen doesn't activate the
brain stem correctly, we have trouble sleeping. Or it's the amygdala, the emotional center
of the brain, close to the hippocampus, the memory center of the brain. When estrogen
levels ebb in these regions, we start getting mood swings perhaps and forget
things.

So this is the brain anatomy of menopause, if you will. But let me show you what an actual
woman's brain can look like. So this is a kind of brain scan called positron emission
tomography or PET. It looks at brain energy levels. And this is what you want your brain
to look like when you're in your 40s. Really nice and bright. Now this brain belongs to a
woman who was 43 years old when she was first scanned, before menopause. And this is the
same brain just eight years later, after menopause. If we put them side by side, I think
you can easily see how the bright yellow turned orange, almost purple. That's a 30 percent
drop in brain energy levels. Now in general, this just doesn't seem to happen to a man of
the same age. In our studies with hundreds of people, we show that middle-aged men usually
have high brain energy levels. For women, brain energy is usually fine before menopause,
but then it gradually declines during the transition. And this was found independent of
age.

It didn't matter if the women were 40, 50 or 60. What mattered most was that they were in
menopause. So of course we need more research to confirm this, but it looks like women's
brains in midlife are more sensitive to hormonal aging than just straight up chronological
aging. And this is important information to have, because so many women can feel these
changes. So many of our patients have said to me that they feel like their minds are
playing tricks on them, to put it mildly. So I really want to validate this, because it's
real. And so just to clarify, if this is you, you are not crazy.

Thank you. It's important. So many women have worried that they might be losing their
minds. But the truth is that your brain might be going through a transition, or is going
through a transition and needs time and support to adjust. Also, if anyone is concerned
that middle-aged women might be underperformers, I'll just quickly add that we looked at
cognitive performance, God forbid, right?

Let's not do that. But we looked at cognitive performance, and we found absolutely no
differences between men and women before and after menopause. And other studies confirm
this. So basically, we may be tired, but we are just as sharp.

Get that out of the way. That all said, there is something else more serious that deserves
our attention. If you remember, I mentioned that estrogen declines could potentially
promote the formation of amyloid plaques, or Alzheimer's plaques. But there's another kind
of brain scan that looks exactly at those plaques. And we used it to show that middle-aged
men hardly have any, which is great. But for women, there's quite a bit of an increase
during the transition to menopause. And I want to be really, really clear here that not
all women develop the plaques, and not all women with the plaques develop dementia. Having
the plaques is a risk factor, it is not in any way a diagnosis, especially at this
stage. But still, it's quite an insight to associate Alzheimer's with menopause. We think
of menopause as belonging to middle age and Alzheimer's as belonging to old age. But in
reality, many studies, including my own work, had shown that Alzheimer's disease starts
with negative changes in the brain years, if not decades, prior to clinical
symptoms.

So for women, it looks like this process starts in midlife, during menopause. Which is
important information to have, because it gives us a time line to start looking for those
changes. So in terms of a time line, most women go through menopause in their early 50s.
But it can be earlier, often because of medical interventions. And the common example is a
hysterectomy and/or an oophorectomy, which is the surgical removal of the uterus and/or
the ovaries. And unfortunately, there is evidence that having the uterus and, more so, the
ovaries removed prior to menopause correlates with the higher risk of dementia in women.
And I know that this is upsetting news, and it's definitely depressing news, but we need
to talk about it because most women are not aware of this correlation, and it seems like
very important information to have. Also, no one is suggesting that women decline these
procedures if they need them.

The point here is that we really need to better understand what happens to our brains as
we go through menopause, natural or medical, and how to protect our brains in the
process. So how do we do that? How do we protect our brains? Should we take hormones?
That's a fair question, it's a good question. And the shortest possible answer right now
is that hormonal therapy can be helpful to alleviate a number of symptoms, like hot
flashes, but it's not currently recommended for dementia prevention. And many of us are
working on testing different formulations and different dosages and different time lines,
and hopefully, all this work will lead to a change in recommendations in the
future. Meanwhile, there are other things that we can do today to support our hormones and
their effects on the brain that do not require medications but do require taking a good
look at our lifestyle. That's because the foods we eat, how much exercise we get, how much
sleep we get or don't get, how much stress we have in our lives, those are all things that
can actually impact our hormones — for better and for worse. Food, for example.

There are many diets out there, but studies have shown that the Mediterranean diet in
particular is supportive of women's health. Women on this diet have a much lower risk of
cognitive decline, of depression, of heart disease, of stroke and of cancer, and they also
have fewer hot flashes. What's interesting about this diet is that it's quite rich in
foods that contain estrogens in the form of phytoestrogens or estrogens from plants that
act like mild estrogens in our bodies. Some phytoestrogens have been linked to a possible
risk of cancer, but not the ones in this diet, which are safe. Especially from flax seeds,
sesame seeds, dried apricots, legumes and a number of fruits. And for some good news, dark
chocolate contains phytoestrogens, too. So diet is one way to gain estrogens, but it's just
as important to avoid things that suppress our estrogens instead, especially stress.
Stress can literally steal your estrogens, and that's because cortisol, which is the main
stress hormone, works in balance with our estrogens.

So if cortisol goes up, your estrogens go down. If cortisol goes down, your estrogens go
back up. So reducing stress is really important. It doesn't just help your day, it also
helps your brain. So these are just a few things that we can do to support our brains and
there are more. But the important thing here is that changing the way we understand the
female brain really changes the way that we care for it, and the way that we frame women's
health. And the more women demand this information, the sooner we'll be able to break the
taboos around menopause, and also come up with solutions that actually work, not just for
Alzheimer's disease, but for women's brain health as a whole. Brain health is women's
health. Thank you.

Thank you. Oh, thank you.

<!--
ad_duration=3.33
comment_count=24
event="TEDWomen 2019"
external_duration=0
external_start_time=0
has_talk_citation=1
intro_duration=11.82
is_subtitle_required="False"
is_talk_featured="True"
language="en"
language_swap="False"
native_language="en"
number_of_related_talks=6
number_of_speakers=1
number_of_subtitled_videos=19
number_of_tags=8
number_of_talk_download_languages=19
number_of_talk_more_resources=2
number_of_talk_recommendations=0
number_of_talks_take_actions=2
post_ad_duration=0.83
published_timestamp="2020-03-10 14:59:54"
recording_date="2019-12-04"
speaker_description="Neuroscientist"
speaker_is_published=1
speaker_name="Lisa Mosconi"
talk_name="How menopause affects the brain"
talks_tags=["science","brain","women","health","neuroscience","medical-research","human-body","biology"]
url_audio="https://download.ted.com/talks/LisaMosconi_2019W.mp3?apikey=acme-roadrunner"
url_photo_speaker="https://pe.tedcdn.com/images/ted/3a5d0c947a4153757994a23546792df4bcec8aa5_254x191.jpg"
url_photo_talk="https://s3.amazonaws.com/talkstar-photos/uploads/e56a3f33-d99e-4107-ae54-c1a10da3c725/LisaMosconi_2019W-embed.jpg"
url_webpage="https://www.ted.com/talks/lisa_mosconi_how_menopause_affects_the_brain"
video_type_name="TED Stage Talk"
-->