---
title: A guide to collaborative leadership
speaker: Lorna Davis
description: >-
 What's the difference between heroes and leaders? In this insightful talk, Lorna
 Davis explains how our idolization of heroes is holding us back from solving big
 problems -- and shows why we need "radical interdependence" to make real change
 happen.
date: 2019-09-24
tags: ["leadership","society","women-in-business","business","work","collaboration"]
slug: lorna_davis_a_guide_to_collaborative_leadership
---

It was a fantastic new pink suit with big buttons and shoulder pads. It was 1997, and I
was the new boss of Griffin's Foods, an iconic cookie and snacks company in New Zealand.
It was my first time as the leader of a company, and I was on the stage to give a big
speech about our ambitious new goals. I knew exactly what my call to action was, which was
"One in every four times a Kiwi eats a snack, it will be one of ours." I emphasized that
we knew how to measure our results and that our future was in our control. Embarrassingly
enough, I finished up with "If not this, what? If not us, who? And if not now, when?"I got
this huge round of applause and I was really, really pleased with myself. I wanted so much
to be a good leader. I wanted to be followed by a devoted team, I wanted to be right. In
short, I wanted to be a hero. A hero selling chips and biscuits in a pink
suit.

What happened after that speech? Nothing. All of that applause did not lead to action.
Nothing changed. Not because they didn't like me or the message. The problem was that no
one knew what they were expected to do. And most importantly, they didn't know that I
needed them. Now, you may think that this is a classic hero speech, where I'm going to tell
you that I overcame that obstacle and triumphed. Actually, I'm going to tell you that in a
world as complex and interconnected as the one we live in, the idea that one person has
the answer is ludicrous. It's not only ineffective, it's dangerous, because it leads us to
believe that it's been solved by that hero, and we have no role. We don't need heroes. We
need radical interdependence, which is just another way of saying we need each other. Even
though other people can be really difficult, sometimes. I spent decades trying to work out
how to be a good leader. I've lived in seven countries and five continents.

And in recent years, I've spent a lot of time with the B Corp community, originally as a
corporate participant and more recently as an ambassador. Now, B Corps are a group of
companies who believe in business as a force for good. There's a tough certification with
about 250 questions about your social and environmental performance. You must legally
declare your intention to serve the community as well as your shareholders and you must
sign the declaration of interdependence. Now one of the things that inspires me the most
about the companies in this movement is that they see themselves as part of a whole
system. It's sort of as if they imagine themselves on a big, flowing river of activity,
where, if they are, for example, soft drinks manufacturers, they understand that upstream
from them, there's water and sugar, and farmers that grow that sugar, and plastic and
metal and glass, all of which flows into this thing that we call a company which has
financial results.

And the flowing continues with consequences. Some of them intended, like refreshment and
hydration, and some unintended, like garbage and obesity. Spending time with leaders in
this space has led me to see that true collaboration is possible, but it's subtle and it's
complex. And the leaders in this space are doing a few things very differently from
traditional heroic leaders. They set goals differently, they announce those goals
differently and they have a very different relationship with other people. Let's begin with
the first difference. A hero sets a goal that can be individually delivered and neatly
measured. You can recognize a heroic goal — they use terms like "revenue" and "market
share" and are often competitive. I mean, remember pink-suit day? Interdependent leaders,
on the other hand, start with a goal that's really important, but is actually impossible
to achieve by one company or one person alone. I want to give you an example from the
clothing industry, which produces 92 million tons of waste a year.

Patagonia and Eileen Fisher are clothing manufacturers, both of them B Corps, both of them
deeply committed to reducing waste. They don't see that their responsibility ends when a
customer buys their clothes. Patagonia encourages you not to buy new clothes from them,
and will repair your old clothes for free. Eileen Fisher will pay you when you bring back
your clothes, and either sell them on or turn them into other clothes. While these two
companies are competitive in some ways, they work together and with others in the industry
to solve shared problems. They take responsibility for things that happen upstream as
well. Around the world, there are around 300 million people who work from home in this
industry, most of them women, many of them in very difficult circumstances with poor
lighting, sewing on buttons and doing detailed stitching. Until 2014, there was no
protection for these workers.

A group of companies got together with a not-for-profit called Nest to create a set of
standards that's now been adopted by the whole industry. Once you've seen problems like
this, you can't unsee them, so you have to ask others to help you to solve them. These
folks take interdependence as a given, and said to me, "We don't compete on human
rights."The second big difference for collaborators is their willingness to declare their
goals before they have a plan. Now the hero only reveals their carefully crafted goal when
the path to achieve it is clear. In fact, the role of the hero announcement is to set the
stage for the big win. Hero announcements are full of triumph. Interdependent leaders, on
the other hand, want other people to help them, so their announcements are often an
invitation for co-creation, and sometimes, they're a call for help. At the North American
division of the French food company Danone, I announced that we wanted to become a B
Corp.

And unlike pink-suit day, I had no plan to get there. I remember the day really clearly.
Everybody in the room gasped, because they knew we didn't have a plan. But they also knew
that we had seen our role in the river that is the food system, and we wanted to make a
change. Making that declaration without a plan meant that so many young people in our
company stepped up to help us, and B Corps around us all rallied around. And the day we
became a B Corp wasn't just a self-congratulatory moment of a hero company — it was more
like a community celebration. Now when you gave goals that you can't achieve alone, and
you've told everyone about them, inevitably, you'll end up at the third big difference,
which is how you see other people, inside your company and outside. Heroes see everyone as
a competitor or a follower. Heroes don't want input, because they want to control
everything because they want the credit. And you can see this in a typical hero meeting.
Heroes like making speeches.

People lean back in their chairs, maybe impressed but not engaged. Interdependent leaders,
on the other hand, understand that they need other people. They know that meetings are not
just mindless calendar fillers. These are the most precious things you have. It's where
people collaborate and communicate and share ideas. People lean forward in meetings like
this, wondering where they might fit in. When I was in Shanghai in China, where I lived for
six years, running the Kraft Foods business, selling, amongst other things, Oreo cookies,
we had a problem with hero culture. We kept on launching new products that failed. And we
would find out afterwards that everyone in the company knew they were going to fail, they
just didn't feel free to tell us. So we changed the way we ran our innovation and planning
meetings in two important ways. First of all, language went back to Chinese. Because even
though everyone spoke great English, when I was in the room and the meeting was in
English, they focused on me.

And I was the foreigner, and I was the boss and I apparently had that intimidating hero
look. The second thing is we asked every single person in the meeting their opinion. And
our understanding of the subtleties of the differences between American taste and Chinese
taste, in this case, really improved, and our new product success rate radically turned
around and we launched a lot of winners, including the now famous green-tea-flavored
Oreos. Hero culture sneaks in everywhere. At Danone, we had a lot of great stuff happening
in one part of the world, and we wanted it to spread to another part of the world. But
when you put a person in business gear up in front of a group of people with PowerPoint,
they have the urge to become sort of heroic. And they make everything look super shiny and
they don't tell the truth. And it's not compelling and it's not even interesting. So, we
changed it and we created these full-day marketplaces, kind of like a big
bazaar.

And everybody was dressed up in costume, some people a little, some people a lot. And
sellers had to man their stalls and sell their ideas as persuasively as possible, and
people who were convinced bought them with fake check books. Creating just a bit of
silliness with the environment and a hat or a scarf drops people's guard and causes ideas
to spread like wildfire. There's no recipe here, but time together has to be carefully
curated and created so that people know that their time is valuable and important, and
they can bring their best selves to the table. Hero culture is present right here in TED.
This whole process makes it look like I think I'm a hero. So just in case there's any
doubt about the point that I'm trying to make, I want to apply these ideas in an area in
which I have zero credibility and zero experience. I'm originally South African, and I'm
deeply passionate about wildlife conservation, most particularly rhinos. Those majestic
creatures with big horns.

Every day, three rhinos are killed, because there are people who think that those horns
are valuable, even though they're just made of the same stuff as hair and fingernails. It
breaks my heart. Like all good recovering heroes, I did everything I could to reduce this
goal to something that I could do by myself. But clearly, stopping rhino poaching is a
goal way too big for me. So I'm immediately in interdependence land. I'm declaring my goal
on this stage. I found other people as passionate as I am and I've asked if I could join
them. And after today, there may be more. And we're now in the complex but inspiring
process of learning how to work together. My dream is that one day, someone will stand on
this stage and tell you how radical interdependence saved my beloved rhinos. Why does hero
culture persist, and why don't we work together more? Well, I don't know why everyone else
does it, but I can tell you why I did it. Interdependence is a lot harder than being a
hero.

It requires us to be open and transparent and vulnerable, and that's not what traditional
leaders have been trained to do. I thought being a hero would keep me safe. I thought that
in the elevation and separation that comes from heroic leadership, that I would be
untouchable. This is an illusion. The joy and success that comes from interdependence and
vulnerability is worth the effort and the risk. And if we're going to solve the challenges
that the world is facing today, we have no alternative, so we had better start getting
good at it. Thank you.

<!--
ad_duration=3.33
comment_count=11
event="TED@BCG Mumbai"
external_start_time=0
has_talk_citation=1
intro_duration=11.82
is_subtitle_required="False"
is_talk_featured="True"
language="en"
language_swap="False"
native_language="en"
number_of_related_talks=6
number_of_speakers=1
number_of_subtitled_videos=13
number_of_tags=6
number_of_talk_download_languages=14
number_of_talk_more_resources=0
number_of_talk_recommendations=1
number_of_talks_take_actions=2
post_ad_duration=0.83
published_timestamp="2019-12-12 16:01:30"
recording_date="2019-09-24"
speaker_description="Business leader"
speaker_is_published=1
speaker_name="Lorna Davis"
talk_more_resources=[]
talk_name="A guide to collaborative leadership"
talk_recommendations_blurb="More resources curated by Lorna Davis"
talks_tags=["leadership","society","women-in-business","business","work","collaboration"]
url_audio="https://download.ted.com/talks/LornaDavis_2019S.mp3?apikey=acme-roadrunner"
url_photo_speaker="https://pe.tedcdn.com/images/ted/c0a9a4339b6aca298b3752a0b70797df7a413ebb_254x191.jpg"
url_photo_talk="https://s3.amazonaws.com/talkstar-photos/uploads/fef782cb-7509-4a79-bfaa-9837addaf95d/LornaDavis_2019S-embed.jpg"
url_webpage="https://www.ted.com/talks/lorna_davis_a_guide_to_collaborative_leadership"
video_type_name="TED Institute Talk"
-->