---
title: How bees can keep the peace between elephants and humans
speaker: Lucy King
description: >-
 Imagine waking in the middle of the night to an elephant ripping the roof from
 your house in search of food. This is a reality in some communities in Africa
 where, as wild spaces shrink, people and elephants are competing for space and
 resources like never before. In this engaging talk, zoologist Lucy King shares
 her solution to the rising conflict: fences made from beehives that keep
 elephants at bay while also helping farmers establish new livelihoods.
date: 2019-12-04
tags: ["farming","animals","humanity","africa","sustainability"]
slug: lucy_king_how_bees_can_keep_the_peace_between_elephants_and_humans
---

Ever since I can remember, African elephants have filled me with a sense of complete awe.
They are the largest land mammal alive today on planet Earth, weighing up to seven tons,
standing three and a half meters tall at the shoulder. They can eat up to 400 kilos of
food in a day, and they disperse vital plant seeds across thousands of kilometers during
their 50-to-60-year life span. Central to their compassionate and complex society are the
matriarchs. These female, strong leaders nurture the young and navigate their way through
the challenges of the African bush to find food, water and security. Their societies are
so complex, we're yet to still fully tease apart how they communicate, how they verbalize
to each other, how their dialects work. And we don't really understand yet how they
navigate the landscape, remembering the safest places to cross a river. I'm pretty sure
that like me, most of you in this room have a similar positive emotional response to these
most magnificent of all animals.

It's really hard not to have watched a documentary, learned about their intelligence or,
if you've been lucky, to see them for yourselves on safari in the wild. But I wonder how
many of you have been truly, utterly terrified by them. I was lucky to be brought up in
Southern Africa by two teacher parents who had long holidays but very short budgets. And
so we used to take our old Ford Cortina Estate, and with my sister, we'd pile in the back,
take our tents and go camping in the different game reserves in Southern Africa. It really
was heaven for a young, budding zoologist like myself. But I remember even at that young
age that I found the tall electric fences blocking off the game parks quite divisive.
Sure, they were keeping elephants out of the communities, but they also kept communities
out of their wild spaces. It really was quite a challenge to me at that young age. It was
only when I moved to Kenya at the age of 14, when I got to connect to the vast, wild open
spaces of East Africa.

And it is here now that I feel truly, instinctively, really at home. I spent many, many
happy years studying elephant behavior in a tent, in Samburu National Reserve, under the
guideship of professor Fritz Vollrath and Iain Douglas-Hamilton, studying for my PhD and
understanding the complexities of elephant societies. But now, in my role as head of the
human-elephant coexistence program for Save the Elephants, we're seeing so much change
happening so fast that it's urged a change in some of our research programs. No longer can
we just sit and understand elephant societies or study just how to stop the ivory trade,
which is horrific and still ongoing. We're having to change our resources more and more to
look at this rising problem of human-elephant conflict, as people and pachyderms compete
for space and resources. It was only as recently as the 1970s that we used to have 1.2
million elephants roaming across Africa. Today, we're edging closer to only having 400,000
left.

And at the same time period, the human population has quadrupled, and the land is being
fragmented at such a pace that it's really hard to keep up with. Too often, these
migrating elephants end up stuck inside communities, looking for food and water but ending
up breaking open water tanks, breaking pipes and, of course, breaking into food stores for
food. It's really a huge challenge. Can you imagine the terror of an elephant literally
ripping the roof off your mud hut in the middle of the night and having to hold your
children away as the trunk reaches in, looking for food in the pitch dark? These elephants
also trample and eat crops, and this is traditionally eroding away that tolerance that
people used to have for elephants. And sadly, we're losing these animals by the day and,
in some countries, by the hour — to not only ivory poaching but this rapid rise in
human-elephant conflict as they compete for space and resources. It's a massive
challenge.

I mean, how do you keep seven-ton pachyderms, that often come in groups of 10 or 12, out
of these very small rural farms when you're dealing with people who are living on the very
edge of poverty? They don't have big budgets. How do you resolve this issue? Well, one
issue is, you can just start to build electric fences, and this is happening across
Africa, we're seeing this more and more. But they are dividing up areas and blocking
corridors. And I'm telling you, these elephants don't think much of it either,
particularly if they're blocking a really special water hole where they need water, or if
there's a very attractive female on the other side. It doesn't take long to knock down one
of these poles. And as soon as there's a gap in the fence, they go back, talk to their
mates and suddenly they're all through, and now you have 12 elephants on the community
side of the fence. And now you're really in trouble. People keep trying to come up with
new designs for electric fences.

Well, these elephants don't think much of those either.

So rather than having these hard-line, straight, electric, really divisive
migratory-blocking fences, there must be other ways to look at this challenge. I'm much
more interested in holistic and natural methods to keep elephants and people apart where
necessary. Simply talking to people, talking to rural pastoralists in northern Kenya who
have so much knowledge about the bush, we discovered this story that they had that
elephants would not feed on trees that had wild beehives in them. Now this was an
interesting story. As the elephants were foraging on the tree, they would break branches
and perhaps break open a wild beehive. And those bees would fly out of their natural nests
and sting the elephants. Now if the elephants got stung, perhaps they would remember that
this tree was dangerous and they wouldn't come back to that same site. It seems impossible
that they could be stung through their thick skin — elephant skin is around two
centimeters thick.

But it seems that they sting them around the watery areas, around the eyes, behind the
ears, in the mouth, up the trunk. You can imagine they would remember that very quickly.
And it's not really one sting that they're scared of. African bees have a phenomenal
ability: when they sting in one site, they release a pheromone that triggers the rest of
the bees to come and sting the same site. So it's not one beesting that they're scared of
— it's perhaps thousands of beestings, coming to sting in the same area — that they're
afraid of. And of course, a good matriarch would always keep her young away from such a
threat. Young calves have much thinner skins, and it's potential that they could be stung
through their thinner skins. So for my PhD, I had this unusual challenge of trying to work
out how African elephants and African bees would interact, when the theory was that they
wouldn't interact at all. How was I going to study this?

Well, what I did was I took the sound of disturbed African honey bees, and I played it
back to elephants resting under trees through a wireless speaker system, so I could
understand how they would react as if there were wild bees in the area. And it turns out
that they react quite dramatically to the sound of African wild bees. Here we are, playing
the bee sounds back to this amazing group of elephants. You can see the ears going up,
going out, they're turning their heads from side to side, one elephant is flicking her
trunk to try and smell. There's another elephant that kicks one of calves on the ground to
tell it to get up as if there is a threat. And one elephant triggers a retreat, and soon
the whole family of elephants are running after her across the savannah in a cloud of
dust.(Sound of bees buzzing)(Sound of bees ends)Now I've done this experiment many, many
times, and the elephants almost always flee.

Not only do they run away, but they dust themselves as they're running, as if to knock
bees out of the air. And we placed infrasonic microphones around the elephants as we did
these experiments. And it turns out they're communicating to each other in infrasonic
rumbles to warn each other of the threat of bees and to stay away from the area. So these
behavioral discoveries really helped us understand how elephants would react should they
hear or see bee sounds. This led me to invent a novel design for a beehive fence, which we
are now building around small, one-to-two-acre farms on the most vulnerable frontline
areas of Africa where humans and elephants are competing for space. These beehive fences
are very, very simple. We use 12 beehives and 12 dummy hives to protect one acre of
farmland. Now a dummy hive is simply a piece of plywood which we cut into squares, paint
yellow and hang in between the hives.

We're basically tricking the elephants into thinking there are more beehives than there
really are. And of course, it literally halves the cost of the fence. So there's a hive
and a dummy hive and a beehive and now dummy hive, every 10 meters around the outside
boundary. They're held up by posts with a shade roof to protect the bees, and they're
interconnected with a simple piece of plain wire, which goes all the way around,
connecting the hives. So if an elephant tries to enter the farm, he will avoid the beehive
at all cost, but he might try and push through between the hive and the dummy hive,
causing all the beehives to swing as the wire hits his chest. And as we know from our
research work, this will cause the elephants to flee and run away — and hopefully remember
not to come back to that risky area. The bees swarm out of the hive, and they really scare
the elephants away. These beehive fences we're studying using things like camera traps to
help us understand how elephants are responding to them at night time, which is when most
of the crop raiding occurs.

And we found in our study farms that we're keeping up to 80 percent of elephants outside
of the boundaries of these farms. And the bees and the beehive fences are also pollinating
the fields. So we're having a great reduction both in elephant crop raids and a boost in
yield through the pollination services that the bees are giving to the crops
themselves. The strength of the beehive fences is really important — the colonies have to
be very strong. So we're trying to help farmers grow pollinator-friendly crops to boost
their hives, boost the strength of their bees and, of course, produce the most amazing
honey. This honey is so valuable as an extra livelihood income for the farmers. It's a
healthy alternative to sugar, and in our community, it's a very valuable present to give a
mother-in-law, which makes it almost priceless.

We now bottle up this honey, and we've called this wild beautiful honey Elephant-Friendly
Honey. It is a fun name, but it also attracts attention to our project and helps people
understand what we're trying to do to save elephants. We're working now with so many women
in over 60 human-elephant conflict sites in 19 countries in Africa and Asia to build these
beehive fences, working very, very closely with so many farmers but particularly now with
women farmers, helping them to live better in harmony with elephants. One of the things
we're trying to do is develop a toolbox of options to live in better harmony with these
massive pachyderms. One of those issues is to try and get farmers, and women in
particular, to think different about what they're planting inside their farms as well. So
we're looking at planting crops that elephants don't particularly want to eat, like
chillies, ginger, Moringa, sunflowers.

And of course, the bees and the beehive fences love these crops too, because they have
beautiful flowers. One of these plants is a spiky plant called sisal — you may know this
here as jute. And this amazing plant can be stripped down and turned into a weaving
product. We're working with these amazing women now who live daily with the challenges of
elephants to use this plant to weave into baskets to provide an alternative income for
them. We've just started construction only three weeks ago on a women's enterprise center
where we're going to be working with these women not only as expert beekeepers but as
amazing basket weavers; they're going to be processing chili oils, sunflower oils, making
lip balms and honey, and we're somewhere on our way to helping these participating farmers
live with better eco-generating projects that live and work better with living with
elephants. So whether it's matriarchs or mothers or researchers like myself, I do see more
women coming to the forefront now to think differently and more boldly about the
challenges that we face.

With more innovation, and perhaps with some more empathy towards each other, I do believe
we can move from a state of conflict with elephants to true coexistence. Thank
you.

<!--
ad_duration=3.33
comment_count=17
event="TEDWomen 2019"
external_start_time=0
has_talk_citation=1
intro_duration=11.82
is_subtitle_required="False"
is_talk_featured="True"
language="en"
language_swap="False"
native_language="en"
number_of_related_talks=6
number_of_speakers=1
number_of_subtitled_videos=18
number_of_tags=5
number_of_talk_download_languages=18
number_of_talk_more_resources=0
number_of_talk_recommendations=1
number_of_talks_take_actions=1
post_ad_duration=0.83
published_timestamp="2020-02-07 15:52:48"
recording_date="2019-12-04"
speaker_description="Human-elephant ambassador"
speaker_is_published=1
speaker_name="Lucy King"
talk_more_resources=[]
talk_name="How bees can keep the peace between elephants and humans"
talk_recommendations_blurb="More resources curated by Lucy King"
talks_tags=["farming","animals","humanity","africa","sustainability"]
url_audio="https://download.ted.com/talks/LucyKing_2019W.mp3?apikey=acme-roadrunner"
url_photo_speaker="https://pe.tedcdn.com/images/ted/4cfad1d0a5c20fbfcf3720b7f81657ab8341a86a_254x191.jpg"
url_photo_talk="https://s3.amazonaws.com/talkstar-photos/uploads/10792876-8d00-422f-abc5-2951cbf806a1/LucyKing_2019W-embed.jpg"
url_webpage="https://www.ted.com/talks/lucy_king_how_bees_can_keep_the_peace_between_elephants_and_humans"
video_type_name="TED Stage Talk"
-->