---
title: How kids can help design cities
speaker: Mara Mintzer
description: >-
 Adults tend to think of kids as "future citizens" -- their ideas and opinions
 will matter someday, just not today. But kids make up a quarter of the population,
 so shouldn't they have a say in what the world they'll inherit will look like?
 Urban planner Mara Mintzer shares what happened when she and her team asked kids
 to help design a park in Boulder, Colorado -- and how it revealed an important
 blind spot in how we construct the built environment. "If we aren't including
 children in our planning, who else aren't we including?" Mintzer asks.
date: 2017-11-11
tags: ["children","tedx","youth","creativity","social-change","urban-planning","society"]
slug: mara_mintzer_how_kids_can_help_design_cities
---

Our society routinely makes decisions without consulting a quarter of the population.
We're making choices about land use, energy production and natural resources without the
ideas and experiences of the full community. The car, an inanimate object, has more say
over public policy than this group of citizens. Can you guess which group I'm talking
about? It's children. I work in urban design, and not surprisingly, most cities are
designed by adults. Urban planners, architects, developers, politicians, and occasionally,
a few loud citizens. Rarely do you consider the voices of a group of four-year-olds,
barely tall enough to reach the podium at city council chambers. But today, I want to ask
you this: What would happen if we asked children to design our cities?

Back in 2009, I was introduced to a small group of people who wanted to start a
child-friendly city initiative in Boulder, Colorado. I come from a family of civil rights
advocates, and I had spent my career until that point working with low-income children and
families. But I had never heard of a child-friendly city initiative before. So I figured
its purpose would be to address some of the frustrations I had encountered as the parent
of a young child. Perhaps we would advocate for more changing tables in restaurants. Or
create indoor play spaces for those cold and rainy days. In other words, make the city
more hospitable to children and families. It wasn't until after I committed to this
project that I realized I had it all wrong. We wouldn't be designing better cities for
children. Children would be designing better cities for themselves, and for the rest of
us, too. Now, I bet you're skeptical about this idea. And honestly, I was,
too.

I mean, there must be a reason the voting age is 18.

How could children possibly understand complex ideas such as the affordable housing crisis
or how to develop a transportation master plan? And even if they had ideas, wouldn't they
be childish? Or unreasonable? Do our cities really need a park made out of
candy?

Or a bridge with water cannons that fire water onto unsuspecting kayakers
below?

While these concerns sound legitimate, I realized that not including children in city
planning was a bigger design problem. After all, shouldn't we include end users in the
design process? If we're building a park to be largely used by kids, then kids should have
a say in the park's design. So with all of this in mind, we formed a program called
"Growing Up Boulder," and my job is to work with children ages zero through 18 to come up
with innovative city-design solutions. How do we do this, you might ask? Let me give you a
real example. In 2012, the city of Boulder decided to redesign a large downtown park,
known as the Civic Area. This space is bounded by a farmers' market on one end, Boulder
Public Library on the other end, and by Boulder Creek, which runs through the middle. The
space needed a new design to better handle the creek's inevitable flash floods, restore a
sense of safety to the area and support an expanded farmers' market.

So from 2012 through 2014, we engaged more than 200 young people in the process, ranging
from preschool through high school students. Now, how did we do this? Let me explain.
First, we visited children in their classrooms and presented the project: what it was, why
their ideas mattered and what would happen with their recommendations. Before we could
influence them, we asked children to record their ideas, based on their own lived
experiences. Then we asked children to go on a field trip with us, to document what they
liked and didn't like about the space, using photography. Through green picture frames,
students highlighted what they liked about the space, such as college students, tubing
down the creek.

Then they flipped those frames over and used the red side to highlight things they didn't
like, such as trash. Our sixth-grade students studied the Civic Area by researching sites
with similar challenges from around the world. Then, we invited the kids to combine their
original ideas with their new inspiration, to synthesize solutions to improve the space.
Each class invited adult planners, city council and community members into the classroom,
to share and discuss their recommendations. Boulder's senior urban planners stepped over
blocks and stuffed animals to explore preschool students' full-size classroom recreation
of the Civic Area. Adult planners marveled at the students' ideas as they shared a park
constructed out of a jelly bracelet. It was supposed to be an ice-skating rink. And then,
public art constructed from animal-shaped plastic beads. And while this may seem
ridiculous, it isn't so different from the models that architects create. Now, fast-forward
four years, and I am pleased to report that many of the children's ideas are being
implemented in the Civic Area.

For example, there will be improved access to Boulder Creek, so kids can play safely in
the water. Lighting in previously dark underpasses, so high school students can walk home
safely after school at night. And separated biking and walking paths, so speeding bikers
won't hit young people as they stroll by the creek. My daughter and I even skated on a
new, child-requested ice-skating rink, last winter. So, were all of the kids' ideas
implemented at the Civic Area? Of course not. Democracy is a messy process. But just as a
reasonable and well-informed adult does not expect all of her ideas to be utilized,
neither does a nine-year-old. We've now been using this process for eight years, and along
the way, we've found some incredible benefits to designing cities with children. First of
all, kids think differently from adults. And that's a good thing. Adults think about
constraints, how much time will a project take, how much money will it cost and how
dangerous will it be.

In other words, "Are we going to get sued?"

It's not that these constraints aren't real, but if we kill off ideas from the beginning,
it limits our creativity and dampens the design process. Kids, on the other hand, think
about possibilities. For kids, the sky is the limit. Literally. When we worked with
middle-school students to design teen-friendly parks, they drew pictures of skydiving,
hang gliding,

and jumping from trampolines into giant foam pits.

Some of this sounds far-fetched, but the commonalities among the activities revealed an
important story. Our adolescents wanted thrill-seeking opportunities. Which makes perfect
sense, given their developmental stage in life. So our task, as connectors between
inspiration and reality, was to point them towards activities and equipment that actually
could be installed in a park. This is exactly what parks in Australia have done, with
their extensive zip lines and their 30-foot-tall climbing towers. When kids dream up a
space, they almost always include fun, play and movement in their designs. Now, this is
not what adults prioritize. But research shows that fun, play and movement are exactly
what adults need to stay healthy, too.

Who wouldn't enjoy a tree house containing a little lending library and comfortable
beanbag chairs for reading? Or what about a public art display that sprays paint onto a
canvas each time you walk up the steps? In addition to fun and play, children value beauty
in their designs. When tasked with designing dense affordable housing, kids rejected the
blocks of identical, beige condominiums so many developers favor, and instead, put bright
colors on everything, from housing to play equipment. They placed flowers between biking
and walking paths, and placed benches along the creek, so kids could hang out with their
friends and enjoy the tranquility of the water. Which leads me to nature. Children have a
biological need to connect with nature, and this shows up in their designs. They want
nature right in their backyards, not four blocks away. So they design communities that
incorporate water, fruit trees, flowers and animals into their common spaces on
site.

For better or worse, this is logical, because five-year-olds today are rarely allowed to
walk four blocks to access a park by themselves. And nature in one's immediate environment
benefits everyone, since it has been shown to have restorative effects for all ages. It may
come as a surprise, but we even take into consideration the desires or our littlest
citizens, babies and toddlers. From toddlers, we learned that the joy of walking comes
from what you discover along the way. When they evaluated the walkability of Boulder's
19th Street corridor, toddlers spent long stretches exploring leaves in a ditch and
sparkles in the sidewalk. They reminded us to slow down and design a path where the
journey is as important as the destination. In addition to trees and plants, kids almost
always include animals in their designs. Insects, birds and small mammals figure
prominently into children's pictures.

Whether it's because they're closer to the ground and can see the grasshoppers better than
we can, or simply because they have a greater sense of empathy for other beings, children
almost always include non-human species in their ideal worlds. Across the board, children
are inclusive in their city planning. They design for everyone, from their grandmother in
a wheelchair to the homeless woman they see sleeping in the park. Children design for
living creatures, not for cars, egos or corporations. The last and perhaps most compelling
discovery we made is that a city friendly to children is a city friendly to all. Bogota,
Colombia mayor Enrique Peñalosa observed that children are a kind of indicator species. If
we can build a successful city for children, we will have a successful city for all
people. Think about it. Kids can't just hop in a car and drive to the store. And most kids
can't afford an expensive lunch at the nearby cafe.

So if we build cities that take into the consideration their needs for alternative forms
of transportation and for cheaper food venues, we meet the needs of many other
populations, too. The more frequent and more affordable bus service, so desired by our
youth, also supports the elderly who wish to live independently, after they can no longer
drive cars. Teens' recommendations for smooth, protected walking and skateboarding paths
also support the person in a wheelchair who wishes to go smoothly down the path, or the
parent pushing a new stroller. So to me, all of this has revealed something important. An
important blind spot. If we aren't including children in our planning, who else aren't we
including? Are we listening to people of color, immigrants, the elderly and people with
disabilities, or with reduced incomes? What innovative design solutions are we
overlooking, because we aren't hearing the voices of the full community?

We can't possibly know the needs and wants of other people without asking. That goes for
kids and for everyone else. So, adults, let's stop thinking of our children as future
citizens and instead, start valuing them for the citizens they are today. Because our
children are designing the cities that will make us happier and healthier. Cities filled
with nature, play, movement, social connection and beauty. Children are designing the
cities we all want to live in. Thank you.

<!--
ad_duration=3.33
comment_count=20
event="TEDxMileHigh"
external_start_time=0
has_talk_citation=1
intro_duration=11.82
is_subtitle_required="False"
is_talk_featured="True"
language="en"
language_swap="False"
native_language="en"
number_of_related_talks=6
number_of_speakers=1
number_of_subtitled_videos=20
number_of_tags=7
number_of_talk_download_languages=20
number_of_talk_more_resources=0
number_of_talk_recommendations=2
number_of_talks_take_actions=2
post_ad_duration=0.83
published_timestamp="2018-11-07 20:38:48"
recording_date="2017-11-11"
speaker_description="Community engagement specialist"
speaker_is_published=1
speaker_name="Mara Mintzer"
talk_more_resources=[]
talk_name="How kids can help design cities"
talk_recommendations_blurb="More resources curated by Mara Mintzer"
talks_tags=["children","tedx","youth","creativity","social-change","urban-planning","society"]
url_audio="https://download.ted.com/talks/MaraMintzer_2017X.mp3?apikey=acme-roadrunner"
url_photo_speaker="https://pe.tedcdn.com/images/ted/1676bf3185350ada954baa4c17af60db0a76d689_254x191.jpg"
url_photo_talk="https://s3.amazonaws.com/talkstar-photos/uploads/48e1c498-e434-434e-8bb9-c48db45c90ae/MaraMintzer_2017X-embed.jpg"
url_webpage="https://www.ted.com/talks/mara_mintzer_how_kids_can_help_design_cities"
video_type_name="TEDx Talk"
-->