---
title: The economic benefits of climate action
speaker: Marcelo Mena
description: >-
 Marcelo Mena, the former environment minister of Chile, is on a mission to create
 a zero-emission economy in his country by 2050. In a conversation about climate
 action, he discusses how the COVID-19 pandemic is changing Chile's ambitious plan
 to tackle climate change -- and explains why the green recovery needs to be
 powered by both political leaders and citizens alike. (This virtual conversation,
 hosted by TED current affairs curator Whitney Pennington Rodgers and global
 curator Bruno Giussani, was recorded on May 26, 2020.)
date: 2020-05-26
tags: ["climate-change","economics","activism","south-america","green","society","social-change"]
slug: marcelo_mena_the_economic_benefits_of_climate_action
---

Whitney Pennington Rodgers: Marcelo Mena is an environmentalist and a scholar, and he is
the former Minister of Environment for Chile. Welcome, Marcelo. Marcelo Mena: How are you
doing, Whitney? Thanks for the invitation. WPR: Perfect. Great. Of course, thank you so
much for being with us here today. And you know, before we dive into the future of climate
action in Chile and beyond, I think it would be great for us to talk about the present and
why Chile really represents a country that is worth thinking about when we talk about
climate. You know, recently there have been lots of commendable actions taken by your
country when we think about climate. Chile recently committed to net-zero emissions by
2050, the first in the Americas to do this, and that's especially notable when you think
about how much of Chile's economy really depends on carbon emissions: mining and
agriculture and spaces like that.

So could you start a little bit by just talking about how would this even be possible to
get to net-zero emissions in 30 years, and what would that mean for Chile? MM: Mm-hmm. It
was a very surreal image when we saw Minister Schmidt, the COP25 president, Patricia
Espinosa, the UN head on climate change, with masks, delivering this new NDC. The
important thing here is, things that are hard to build require consensus, but therefore to
get rid of that commitment, you need to have another consensus. This hasn't happened, so
the thing is, the reason why Chile has a sort of vision towards mitigation that's
ambitious is that we see that there's a big economic benefit. We have seen, we've
witnessed, what the renewable energy sector has been able to do for investment, for
lowering energy costs. And so therefore to reach this goal, we will inevitably expand to
100 percent renewable, but we'll also transform our industry, which is heavy on fossil
fuels, towards low emissions, with the hydrogen economy kicking in, with a recently
launched committee that I formed, that Minister Jobet, the Minister of Energy, set
up.

And also energy efficiency and a lot of capture, carbon capture. We are endowed with a lot
of natural capital. Taking care of that natural capital and expanding plantations will
allow us to reach net-zero by 2050.WPR: That's great. And now it seems like Chile has such
a huge focus, then, in thinking about renewable energy and thinking about climate. But
this wasn't always the case. Could you talk a little bit, I guess, about the history of
how Chile arrived at this moment? MM: Yeah, so in 2011, 2010, we had an energy discussion
with incumbents saying the only way we could solve our energy problems will be through
large coal and large hydro in the Patagonia. And that really polarized the discussion. We
got together as a community after large protests that triggered a lot of social movements,
and we started discussing how we should be able to do our energy going forward. The
population, public unrest, set up almost 6,000 megawatts of coal-fired power plants to
never be built.

And when the government, Michelle Bachelet's government came in, we pulled the plug on the
HidroAysén project, which is a big hydro project in the Patagonia. And both of these
conditions enabled an opportunity for renewable energy to set in. We put in carbon taxes,
we put in environmental regulations, and we set up an energy strategy that we did,
building on discussing and looking at the data, in which we thought that the 70 percent
renewable energy by 2050 was going to be a target that we could agree on. This target has
been long surpassed. Now we're thinking of reaching that same goal by 2030.WPR: And what
you were saying about social protests, that's something that a lot of people maybe have
been following news of what's going in Chile are familiar with recent social protests, and
I think I'm curious about how you see that factoring in to climate action moving forward.
How might these social protests play a role in what climate action you
see?

And, really, how is it possible for Chile to be a leader in climate action while also
struggling with some of these social issues? MM: Well, the social issues, which are very
profound and important to address, caused, for example, COP25 to not be able to be held in
Santiago and to go to Madrid. And this also shifted a whole bunch of the discussions and
announcements that weren't done and we were expecting to have. But regardless of this, the
fact that we have this commitment from the government today shows that there's a
resolution to continue forward. But really, the economic model of Chile was brought into
question, because the environmental issues, for example, are quite widespread, and many
times you have large coal-fired power plants being situated where people live and with
higher mortality rates. Somebody who lives where a power plant is installed has twice the
rate of death in comparison to other people in Chile.

So the model of having many people be impacted for the benefit of few is something that
caused and triggered the social unrest. And it goes into the economic model itself of
extracting, polluting, impacting communities that may not see the benefits of these
economic activities. So while we've done a lot — we've come a long way, for example, in
securing a very emblematic agreement to phase out coal-fired power plants — many people
feel that this wasn't done fast enough and want this action to be brought faster. WPR: And
it sounds like having people be the voice and the engine behind making that happen has
really been part of this historical thread with climate action in Chile and seems like it
would really lead things moving into the future. MM: No, definitely, and we will continue.
Yes, go ahead. Sorry. WPR: Go ahead. Please go ahead. We have a little bit of a delay. MM:
Going forward, we're going to be ...

Starting out, we are doing well, but I think we need to double down on our commitments. So
even though we have ministries involved, we have civil society involved, we need to bring
in the mainstream industry. I think, for example, the mining sector has a great
opportunity to be the solution for the environmental issues, because we provide the
copper, the cobalt, the lithium that are required for solar PV panels, for battery
storage. But we need to do this in a clean manner. I think that's the biggest challenge
we're going to have in the next 20 years ahead. WPR: And sort of pivoting to the pandemic
and to thinking about what's going on right now, the entire world has obviously been
devastated by this crisis. What have been some of the unique challenges that Chile has
faced during this pandemic? MM: Well, definitely, as anybody, we are always struggling
within taking actions today to prevent a deeper impact in the future. And we started off
pretty well. We shut off schools.

We shut off different cities and had a quarantine. But we gave the wrong signals to people
and we didn't have a consistent effort, and this has brought us to have the highest
infection rates per capita in the world these days. So this goes to show that — the same
parallels with climate change. We need to take action now to prevent deeper impact later.
And I think we need to take the lesson of this to continue with an effort, because one
thing is to announce an ambitious NDC. Another thing is to invest and do the regulations
that you require to turn this into reality. But there are some things that are
interesting. The pollution in Santiago, which is one of the most polluted capitals
historically in Latin America, has dropped substantially. The car-related emissions are
down almost 80 to 90 percent, which is pretty substantive. And we look at the example of
what's going on. Harvard University showed a study in which they showed higher mortality
rates for more polluted cities.

And this is also the case in Chile. For every microgram of pollution, PM2.5, there is an
increase of the fatality rate of nine percent. But the thing is, we could also look back
at what we've achieved up to now. Had we not taken measures to clean the air, as we've
done in Chile these last 20 years, we would be talking about five times more people would
have died from COVID. We have around 800 people that have died due to COVID directly, but
this would have been much higher had we not taken action. And in fact, due to the lower
pollution, if we estimate and predict this to the rest of the year, we will have saved as
many lives reducing the pollution as we have lost in COVID, showing that there's a
pandemic that we also need to address, which is the crisis on air pollution that
suffocates many cities in the world. WPR: And it seems like that's probably something that
we're seeing in other areas around the world. As you're suggesting, air pollution is a
problem everywhere.

And I'm curious also how these challenges that you've mentioned, and maybe others, might
hinder or help some of this progress that you're hoping to make towards climate action.
How do you see this factoring in to some of the decisions that might be made going forward
in Chile and beyond? MM: OK, so we have a higher fatality rate and more polluted cities,
and we have a climate action to carry out. This is going to be a decisive decade, in which
we need to lay the groundwork for our lower-emissions strategies. So whatever we do today
cannot lock us in to an incompatible climate future. We need to lay the groundwork for
this low-emissions transition. So therefore, our green recovery efforts need to be done,
as Kristalina [Georgieva] spoke last week, has to be related to a green recovery that
creates jobs immediately, that addresses the poverty issues that we have on energy today
in southern Chile, and we need to use this for expanding renewable energy and expanding
the successful efforts that we've done on electromobility.

Today, we have the largest fleet of electric buses outside of China, but we could actually
make this go even bigger, because we've seen that the reductions in cost have been almost
70 percent in comparison to diesel buses. So we should use this opportunity to expand. And
multiple stakeholders are working. We're working together to call on the government to do
a green recovery, to use the green bonds that we've already issued and under which we've
gotten really low rates for interest rates, to do and fund cleaning the air, cleaning the
transportation and laying the groundwork for a cleaner tomorrow in the mining sector,
which is our biggest challenge going forward. WPR: And then as far as the way that you
think about and conceptualize climate action, have you personally had any changes to your
thinking, just as a result of what you're seeing through this pandemic? MM: Yeah, I think
we start looking around, everybody had to struggle and find that we could do much more
with less, and keeping a full economy that requires you to buy an extra t-shirt that you
don't need, the fact that we're using three times more clothes than we were maybe 20 years
ago shows that we are blowing up an economy that requires us to destroy the environment,
in a way, to continue forward.

And the food system is going to be probably our biggest challenge, and even though I've
been working with electric buses and electromobility and just the more conventional
mitigation, I think our biggest cultural challenge will be to talk about how our food
decisions impact the way that we will have a future."Nature" just put out a report that
showed something that when we were in the government, we had talked about. When Chile was
good in soccer, we started going deeper into the wintertime contests, and we started
winning games. But to win those games, we started doing a lot of barbecues, and the paper
that came out showed something that, when we explained this to people, that you guys are
messing up the air with barbecues, people thought we were crazy. Well, the "Nature" report
now shows that we actually fouled the air and destroyed the air, annihilated the air,
because we wanted to celebrate the soccer. And we set this up to people, and people
thought we were crazy.

Now people acknowledge the fact that the basic things that you could do, such as the way
that you choose how to cook, could actually impact your air. So I think going forward
these cultural challenges that we need to do, we need to tackle them head-on. We should
need to show the evidence. Otherwise, we're just going to be ignoring problems and letting
them perpetuate for the future. WPR: And, you know, for nations who have not really
prioritized climate in the same way that Chile has, are there lessons that you think can
be learned from some of the choices that Chile has made in recent years that other nations
can apply, and how could folks in other countries implement some of these strategies that
you implemented in Chile? MM: So, many people in the US and across the world know about the
Chilean sea bass. The Chilean sea bass was overfished and almost collapsed. One of the
things that we did under the support from "National Geographic" and with the leadership of
President Bachelet was to expand marine protection, from four percent of our oceans to 43
percent within one government, which is the largest leap.

There's only comparison to the US during Obama in terms of protection. And this is because
we want this population also to recover. You know, when you let the park stop fishing, the
overflow from the fishing will actually increase the biomass sixfold. So I think one of
the efforts that we need to do as we talk about the biodiversity convention that's going
to happen this next year is that we need to change our relationship to the environment. We
need to protect and conserve our ecosystems, so they provide the services that they do
today. Today, 96 percent of all mammals, land mammals, are humans or stuff humans eat.
Only four percent of land mammals are wild. When I heard that data, from "National
Geographic," for the first time, I couldn't believe it. We've changed our relationship
with the planet, and we're suffering these decisions because we see zoonotic diseases —
not just coronavirus — spread time after time. WPR: And we have Bruno here — hi, Bruno —
with a question from the community. Bruno Giussani: Hi.

Absolutely. Hello, Marcelo. This is a question from Melissa Mahoney. She asks if you can
expand on what economic benefits of net-zero emissions are. And especially, could those
benefits be the same for Chile and for other countries? MM: Good. For example, when I
worked in the World Bank, we supported Chile to look into the macroeconomic impacts of the
net-zero target. And it was shown that Chile will grow 4.4 percent more. So we turned the
risk of climate change, and we turned it into an opportunity of expanded growth. This
manifests in lower transportation costs, lower energy costs, and this makes the economy
more competitive. The costs of reaching the net-zero target are much lower than the
benefits that we will have to reap. And we're not even talking about cleaner air benefits,
we're talking about direct economic benefits of having increased investments, which is
something that every country will require in these years to recover from the COVID crisis,
and lower energy costs.

So that's how it manifests, and this is a consensus today that we need to have more
renewable energy because this is the way that we've had cleaner air and lower energy
costs. BG: There is another question from someone in the audience, asking, "Countries
across Latin America have very different attitudes on climate. Can you comment on
that?"MM: So Pew Research Center has been putting out reports regarding what is the main
external threat that you have. And in Europe, in the US, the biggest threat was either
China or ISIS or some external bellicose threat. In Latin America and Africa, it's climate
change, number one, and Chile is one of the highest, with 86 percent of Chileans saying
that climate change is the greatest external threat. And this is also very high across the
region. We could have populist governments coming in, changing their priorities, but the
reality is, people are concerned, because they see the threat of climate change every day,
and regardless of whether the national government believes in it, climate change is real
and is causing impacts and causing poverty in the region. BG: Thank you,
Marcelo.

Back to you, Whitney. WPR: Thank you. Thank you, Bruno. And Marcelo, just one last question
before we actually say goodbye, which is just, knowing that you were involved in the
negotiations for the Paris Agreement, are there things that you take from that experience
that you can apply to this moment as we think about emerging from this crisis and coming
out of the COVID-19 pandemic? MM: Yes, that there will always be a populist that will be
opposing climate action, and the way to get at this is to make the economic case, so
regardless of what happens, there will be an economic case for spending on renewable
energy. The US grew its renewable energy investments around 40 percent last year. In
Brazil, it grew almost 10 percent. And so therefore, if we are able to align the economic
goals with climate goals, you will be able to make this go forward. There's the Network
for Greening the Financial System that puts together central bankers.

The World Bank launched a coalition of finance ministers for climate action. These are
great efforts that will allow us to have the financial system support climate action
because there's an economic benefit, because it's important for you, for your fiduciary
responsibilities, to disclose the risks you have, both transitionally and physically. And
if we are able to do this, regardless of what negotiations happen, because there will
always be problems with the consensus, you will continue to have a resilient approach
because climate action will continue because you can have the economic system support
this. WPR: That's really great. Thank you so much, Marcelo, for being with us to share your
perspective and your insight. It's really great to sort of zoom in on some of the things
happening in Chile and how that might apply to all of us all over the world. Thank you for
joining us today. MM: Thanks.

<!--
ad_duration=3.33
comment_count=3
event="TED2020"
has_talk_citation=1
intro_duration=11.82
is_subtitle_required="False"
is_talk_featured="True"
language="en"
language_swap="False"
native_language="en"
number_of_related_talks=6
number_of_speakers=2
number_of_subtitled_videos=1
number_of_tags=7
number_of_talk_download_languages=1
number_of_talk_more_resources=0
number_of_talk_recommendations=1
number_of_talks_take_actions=2
post_ad_duration=0.83
published_timestamp="2020-06-08 14:52:55"
recording_date="2020-05-26"
speaker_description="Former environment minister of Chile"
speaker_is_published=1
speaker_name="Marcelo Mena"
talk_more_resources=[]
talk_name="The economic benefits of climate action"
talk_recommendations_blurb="More resources curated by Marcelo Mena"
talks_tags=["climate-change","economics","activism","south-america","green","society","social-change"]
url_photo_speaker="https://pe.tedcdn.com/images/ted/0b4fcdef687b71287fca4ef6192c453c5ed91f6a_254x191.jpg"
url_photo_talk="https://s3.amazonaws.com/talkstar-photos/uploads/e052a4e7-1570-4f6f-8f41-a72a7a4dd4e0/MarceloMena_2020S-embed.jpg"
url_webpage="https://www.ted.com/talks/marcelo_mena_the_economic_benefits_of_climate_action"
video_type_name="TED Stage Talk"
-->