---
title: This is your brain on air pollution
speaker: María Neira
description: >-
 Air pollution knows no borders -- even in your own body, says public health
 expert María Neira. In this startling talk, she describes how the microscopic
 particles and chemicals you breathe affect all your major organs (including your
 brain) and calls on both the public and those in power to take action to stop the
 sources of pollution.
date: 2019-07-20
tags: ["health","pollution","environment","brain","science","global-issues","human-body","biosphere"]
slug: maria_neira_this_is_your_brain_on_air_pollution
---

There is something we desperately need that we cannot stop doing: it is breathing. Do you
want to try? Why don't we stop breathing together for, let's say, even 10 seconds. Is that
OK? Let's do it. Get ready ... OK, now!Oof, difficult, isn't it? Well, this is an
incredible number that will again take your breath away: seven. Seven what? Seven million
premature deaths a year caused by exposure to the bad quality of the air we breathe.
Imagine — it's like more than the entire population of my dear Madrid will be wiped out in
one year. And you may ask: Has this information been disclosed? Has this information been
publicized, distributed? Well, yes. We have at the moment more than 70,000 scientific
papers examining the relationship between air pollution and our health, and the global
media has been regularly covering this issue. In fact, in a relatively short period of
time, we have come to know that air pollution is having a negative impact on almost all
our major organs. Let's start by the lungs.

When we think about air pollution, we always think about the lungs. In fact, every time we
take a breath, we are inhaling toxic pollutants, and our poor pink and lovely lungs are
suffering all of that. Over the last 10 years, we have put together a lot of knowledge
about what's happened to that, but let me tell you first what is air pollution. OK, air
pollution is a very complex mixture of solid particles, liquid droplets and gaseous
chemicals. Imagine all of this mixture that might come from sources like household fuel
burning or industry or traffic or many other indoor and outdoor sources. And, of course,
different sources of pollution will make different mixtures of pollutants. The point is
that all of these toxins, they can be combined in different ways. Let's take, for
instance, the particulate matter, the PM. It can be a mixture that will include — look at
the cocktail here — soil and road dust, sea salt, toxic metals, diesel smog, nitrates and
sulfates, and all of this toxic poison, this delicious cocktail, is going through our
lungs every day, and we are constantly exposed to this air pollution because we cannot
stop breathing.

I mean, we can do it for 10 seconds, but no more than that. We cannot stop breathing and,
in addition, we need, every day, around 10,000 liters of air. So we said that we have seven
million deaths caused by air pollution every year. Are we panicking? Are we keeping calm?
Are we declaring a national disaster, a global emergency? Well, no, and in fact I'm asking
myself this question every day: What is happening? But here is something that maybe will
force us to react more quickly. Air pollution is not just affecting our lungs. It's
affecting our brain as well. This is our brain. Beautiful. We all have it. We all need it.
Hopefully, we all use it —

some more than others. And in the last 10 years of history, the research about the
relationship between air pollution and our brain's health has been increased dramatically,
so maybe now our brain is going up in smoke. But let me tell you the evidence, what we
know so far about air pollution in our brain. First, there is an emerging body of evidence
regarding the potential harmful effects of air pollutants into our central nervous system.
But let's go back to the toxic particles. Remember? We left them at the lungs, enjoying
life, polluting everything. But now the smallest of them, they can cross into the
bloodstream, and from the bloodstream, pumped by the heart, they can reach the whole body,
threatening every organ, including the brain. We used to say that air pollution has no
borders, and it's true as well within our bodies, because air pollutants will cross the
placental barrier and reach the fetus and alter the cerebral cortex of our children even
before they take their first breath. Second, several studies have suggested that both
prenatal and early childhood long-term exposure to air pollution will have a negative
influence on neural development, will have lower cognitive test outcomes, and there will
be an influence as well, a negative influence, on some behavioral disorders like autism
and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.

In addition to that, some evidence found that exposing our children's and young adults'
brains for a long time to particulate matter will cause some reactions like brain
inflammation, altering the neural response and [also] leading to the influence of more
protein plaques that are accumulating, and those can increase the risks for diseases like
Alzheimer's and Parkinson's. Ironic, isn't it: we are investing in our children's future,
we are sending them to school every day to expand their minds, the society is investing in
their education, and yet the air they breathe while waiting for the school bus is
influencing negatively the development of their brain. Let's go to the third: What about
adults? According to recent scientific evidence, long-term exposure to particulate matter
will cause a cognitive decline in study participants as they age. And not only that, if
you expose them to long-term, very fine particulate matter, their brain will age more
rapidly, and they will have higher odds of having small, silent strokes. The last one — and
I will not give you more evidence, because there is a ton of [it] — some epidemiological
studies in animal models have suggested that there might be an increased risk of dementia
with sustained exposure to air pollutants. So, almost everybody is exposed to air
pollution.

Whether you live in a rural area or an urban area, whether you live in a high-income
country or a low-income country, everybody's brains, including yours, are at risk. As a
medical doctor, I have been dedicating the last more than 20 years now of my professional
life to raise awareness about public health issues, public health risks, at the World
Health Organization, and I know that the knowledge is there and the solutions as well.
Sure, some places are more polluted than others, but this a global issue, and no
individual, no city, no group, no country, no region will be able to solve it alone. We
need very strong commitments and very strong action by everyone: civil society, private
sector, even individuals. We all have a role to play. Yes, we need to influence the way we
consume, the way we commute, the way we use our energy. And the good thing is that all of
those solutions are available.

The question is, if we postpone action by one day, there might be thousands of lives that
we will lose, but if we postpone it by one year, we might be losing again seven million.
So every policy maker, every politician, needs to be aware of the consequences on human
health of postponing their decisions. In fact, this is not the first time in history that
we are confronted with the risks of this invisible killer. This was London in 1952, and as
was done in London in the '50s and the '60s, governments and cities, they need to take
urgent action to stop the terrible impact of air pollution. Every politician must know
that delaying what they call the tough actions, like reducing traffic in cities or
investing in public transport and engaging in promoting cycling in cities, investing in
renewable energy, promoting cleaner energy for cooking, cooling and transportation and
heating are solutions that are very smart, because, in fact, they reduce emissions, they
improve air quality in line with WHO standards, which are the standards that will protect
ourselves. So in fact, all politicians that we need these very strong political commitments
and political will from, but [we need] all of them now.

Those who fail, who postpone action, they have been requested even to defend their
position in court. And from now on, no politician will be able to say, "I didn't know."So
the question here is: How many lives, loss of quality of life and losing our brain power
are we ready to accept? If the answer is "none," I will request that you, while our brains
are still functioning, while we are still intelligent, please exercise your right, put
pressure on your politicians and make sure that they take action to stop the sources of
air pollution. This is the first thing we need to do to protect yourself and to protect
our beautiful brain. Thank you very much.

<!--
ad_duration=3.33
comment_count=4
event="TEDSummit 2019"
external_duration=0
external_start_time=0
has_talk_citation=1
intro_duration=11.82
is_subtitle_required="False"
is_talk_featured="True"
language="en"
language_swap="False"
native_language="en"
number_of_related_talks=6
number_of_speakers=1
number_of_subtitled_videos=15
number_of_tags=8
number_of_talk_download_languages=16
number_of_talk_more_resources=0
number_of_talk_recommendations=0
number_of_talks_take_actions=2
post_ad_duration=0.83
published_timestamp="2020-02-19 20:51:53"
recording_date="2019-07-20"
speaker_description="Public health leader"
speaker_is_published=1
speaker_name="María Neira"
talk_more_resources=[]
talk_name="This is your brain on air pollution"
talks_tags=["health","pollution","environment","brain","science","global-issues","human-body","biosphere"]
url_photo_speaker="https://pe.tedcdn.com/images/ted/e3742dbd462bfdf931ca8f6d9a3af81c1a7f2fc9_254x191.jpg"
url_photo_talk="https://s3.amazonaws.com/talkstar-photos/uploads/4621acde-9804-4ead-9d7b-96d58229c43b/MariaNeira_2019T-embed.jpg"
url_webpage="https://www.ted.com/talks/maria_neira_this_is_your_brain_on_air_pollution"
video_type_name="TED Stage Talk"
-->