---
title: How supply chain transparency can help the planet
speaker: Markus Mutz
description: >-
 Given the option, few would choose to buy products that harm the earth -- yet
 it's nearly impossible to know how most consumer goods are made or where they're
 sourced from. That's about to change, says supply chain innovator Markus Mutz. He
 shares how he used blockchain technology to track Patagonian toothfish on their
 journey from ocean to dinner plate -- and proved it's possible to offer consumers
 a product they can trust.
date: 2019-09-24
tags: ["blockchain","technology","sustainability","innovation","business","environment","consumerism"]
slug: markus_mutz_how_supply_chain_transparency_can_help_the_planet
---

In almost all aspects of our lives we have perfect information available instantaneously.
My phone can tell me everything about my finances, where precisely I am on a map and the
best way to my next destination, all with a click of a button. But this availability of
information and transparency almost completely disappears when it comes to consumer
products. If you go to the seafood counter at your local supermarket, you can probably
choose between several different types of fish. But chances are, they won't be able to
tell you who caught the fish, where precisely it was caught, whether it is sustainable to
catch it there and how it got transported. And that holds true for almost everything we
buy. Every can of soup, every piece of meat, every T-shirt. We as humans, right now, are
destroying the only thing we really need to survive: our planet. And most of the horrible
problems that we're facing today, like climate change and modern slavery in supply chains,
come down to decisions.

Human decisions to produce something one way and not another. And that's how we, as
consumers, end up making decisions that harm the planet or our fellow humans. By choosing
the wrong products. But I refuse to believe that anybody here in this room, or frankly,
anybody on this planet, really wants to buy a product that harms the planet or our fellow
humans if given the choice. But you see, choice is a loaded word. Choice means there's
another option. Choice means you can afford that option. But choice also means you have
enough information to make an informed decision. And that information nowadays simply just
doesn't exist. Or at least it's really, really hard to access. But I think this is about
to change. Because we can use technology to solve this information problem. And many of
the specific technologies that we need to do that have become better and cheaper over the
recent years, and are now ready to be used at scale. So, over the past two years, my team
and I have been working with one of the world's largest conservation organizations, WWF,
and we've founded a company called OpenSC, where SC stands for supply chain.

And we believe that by using technology we can help to create transparency and
traceability in supply chains, and through that, help to completely revolutionize the way
that we buy and also produce products as humans. Now, some of this is going to sound a
little bit like science fiction, but it's already happening. Let me explain. So, in order
to solve this information problem, we need to do three things: verify, trace and share.
Verify specific sustainability and ethical production claims in a data-based and automated
way. Then trace those individual physical products throughout their supply chains, and
finally, share that information with consumers in a way that truly gives them a choice and
lets them make consumption decisions that are more aligned with their values. I'm going to
use a real product and a supply chain where we've made all of this a reality already: a
Patagonian toothfish, or Chilean sea bass, as it's called in the US.Number one,
verify.

Verify how something is produced. But not just by saying, "Trust me, this is good, trust
me, we've done all the right things," but by producing evidence for that individual
physical product, and the way it was produced. By producing evidence for a specific
sustainability or ethical production claim. So for example, in the case of the fish, has
this fish been caught in an area where there's enough of them, so that it's sustainable to
catch it there and not in a marine protected area? So what we're doing here is we're
taking almost real-time GPS data from the ship — the ship that's fishing — and that tells
us where the ship is and where it's going at what speed. And we can then combine that with
other types of data, like, for example, how deep the sea floor is. And combining all of
this information, our machine-learning algorithms can then verify, in an automated way,
whether the ship is only fishing where it's supposed to, or not. And as sensors become
cheaper, we can put them in more places.

And that means we can capture more data, and combining that with advancements in data
science, it means that we can now verify specific sustainability and ethical production
claims in an automated, real-time and ongoing manner. And that really lays the basis for
this information revolution. So, number two, trace. Trace those individual physical
products, so that we can truly say that the claim that we've verified about a certain
product actually belongs to that individual product that we as consumers have right in
front of us. Because without that level of traceability, all that we've really verified in
the first place is that somebody, somewhere, at some point caught a fish in a sustainable
way, or didn't harm the employee when asking them to produce a T-shirt, or didn't use
pesticides when growing a vegetable that didn't actually need it. Only if I give a product
an identity from the start and then trace it throughout the whole supply chain, can this
claim and the value that's been created by producing it in the right way truly stay with
it. Now, I've talked about cheaper sensors.

There are many other technological developments that make all of this much more possible
today than every before. For example, the falling costs of tags. You give a product a
name, a serial number, an identity, the tag is its passport. What you can see here is a
toothfish being caught. This is what's called a longline fishery, so the fish are coming
up onto the boat on individual hooks. And as soon as the fish is on board, it is killed,
and then after that, we insert a small tag into the fish's flesh. And in that tag, there
is an RFID chip with a unique serial number, and that tag follows the fish throughout the
whole supply chain and makes it really easy to sense its presence at any port, on any
truck or in any processing plant. But consumers can't really read RFID tags. And so, when
it comes to filleting and packaging the fish, we read the RFID tag and then remove it. And
then we add a unique QR code to the packaging of the fish.

And that QR code then points back to the same information that we've verified about the
fish in the first place. And so, depending on the type of product that we're working with,
we may use QR codes, bar codes, RFID tags or other tag technologies. But there are also
technologies that are at the brink of large-scale breakthrough that make tags themselves
obsolete. Like, for example, analyzing a product for trace elements that can then tell you
quite accurately where it is actually from. Then there's blockchain. A decentralized
technology can act as a catalyst for this revolution. Because it can help mitigate some of
the trust issues that are inherent to giving people information and then asking them to
change their consumption behavior because of that information. And so, we use blockchain
technology where it adds value to what we're doing. But importantly, we don't let the
limitations that this technology still has today, like, for example, with regards to
scaling, we don't let that stand in our way. And that brings us to the third
point.

Share. How to share the information that we've verified and tracked about where a product
is from, how it was produced and how it got to where it is? How to share this information
is really different from product to product. And different from where you buy it. You
behave differently in those situations. You are stressed and time-poor in the supermarket.
Or with short attention span over dinner, because your date is so cute. Or you are
critical and inquisitive when researching for a larger purchase online. And so for our
fish, we've developed a digital experience that works when buying the fish in a freezer in
a fish specialty store and that gives you all of the information about the fish and its
journey. But we also worked with a restaurant and developed a different digital experience
that only summarizes the key facts about the fish and its journey, and works better in a
dinner setting and, hopefully, there doesn't annoy your date too much. Now, that brings us
full circle.

We've verified that the fish was caught in an area where it's sustainable to do so. We've
then traced it throughout the entire supply chain to maintain its identity and all the
information that's attached to it. And then, we've shared that information with consumers
in a way that gives them a choice and lets them make consumption decisions that are more
in line with their values. Now, for this fish example, this is already rolled out at scale.
This season, the entire fleet of the world's largest toothfish fishing company, Austral
Fisheries, is tagging every single fish that they catch and that ends up in their premium
branded "Glacier 51" product. And you can already buy this fish. And with it, you can have
all of the information I talked about today, and much more, attached to each individual
fish or portion of the fish that you may buy. But this is not a fish or seafood thing.
We're working on many, many different commodities and products and their supply chains
across the globe.

From dairy to fruit and vegetables, to nonfood products made out of wood. As a consumer,
all of this may sound like a huge burden, because you don't have time to look at all of
this information every time you buy something. And I don't expect you to, because you'll
have help with that. In the future, we'll leave the decision of which specific product to
buy increasingly up to machines. An algorithm will know enough about you to make those
decisions for you, so you don't have to. And maybe it will even do a better job at it. In
a recent study, 85 percent of those buying a product through a virtual assistant said that
they, on occasion, actually went with the top product recommendation of that virtual
assistant, rather than the specific product or brand that they set out to buy in the first
place. You just say you need toilet paper, it's then an algorithm that decides which
brand, price point or whether you go with recycled or not.

Well, nowadays this is usually based on what you bought in the past, or whoever pays the
most to the company behind the virtual assistant. But why shouldn't that be also based on
your values? Knowing that you want to buy planet-friendly and knowing whether and how much
you're willing and able to pay for that. Now, that will make it easy and seamless, but
still based on granular effects and data to choose the right products. Not by necessarily
doing it yourself but by asking an algorithm that knows how much you care about this
planet. Not by necessarily doing it yourself but by asking an algorithm that is never
time-poor or distracted, or with short attention span because of the cute date, and that
knows how much you care about this planet and the people living on it, by asking that
algorithm to look at all of that information for you and to decide for you. If we have
reliable and trustworthy information like that and the right systems that make use of it,
consumers will support those who are doing the right thing by producing products in a
sustainable and ethical way.

They will support them every time by choosing their goods over others. And that means that
good producers and processors and retailers will get rewarded. And bad actors will be
forced to adjust their practices or get out of business. And we need that. If we want to
continue to live together on this beautiful planet, we really need it. Thank
you.

<!--
ad_duration=3.33
comment_count=7
event="TED@BCG Mumbai"
external_start_time=0
has_talk_citation=1
intro_duration=11.82
is_subtitle_required="False"
is_talk_featured="True"
language="en"
language_swap="False"
native_language="en"
number_of_related_talks=6
number_of_speakers=1
number_of_subtitled_videos=13
number_of_tags=7
number_of_talk_download_languages=13
number_of_talk_more_resources=0
number_of_talk_recommendations=0
number_of_talks_take_actions=1
post_ad_duration=0.83
published_timestamp="2020-01-15 15:55:57"
recording_date="2019-09-24"
speaker_description="Entrepreneur, supply chain innovator"
speaker_is_published=1
speaker_name="Markus Mutz"
talk_more_resources=[]
talk_name="How supply chain transparency can help the planet"
talks_tags=["blockchain","technology","sustainability","innovation","business","environment","consumerism"]
url_audio="https://download.ted.com/talks/MarkusMutz_2019S.mp3?apikey=acme-roadrunner"
url_photo_speaker="https://pe.tedcdn.com/images/ted/3fc7f873845413a7cad3cde830a1155d4face42d_254x191.jpg"
url_photo_talk="https://s3.amazonaws.com/talkstar-photos/uploads/60491611-1ae4-4bb9-9c59-e92d72f35573/MarkusMutz_2019S-embed.jpg"
url_webpage="https://www.ted.com/talks/markus_mutz_how_supply_chain_transparency_can_help_the_planet"
video_type_name="TED Institute Talk"
-->