---
title: Why your doctor should care about social justice
speaker: Mary Bassett
description: >-
 In Zimbabwe in the 1980s, Mary Bassett witnessed the AIDS epidemic firsthand, and
 she helped set up a clinic to treat and educate local people about the deadly
 virus. But looking back, she regrets not sounding the alarm for the real problem:
 the structural inequities embedded in the world's political and economic
 organizations, inequities that make marginalized people more vulnerable. These
 same structural problems exist in the United States today, and as New York City's
 Health Commissioner, Bassett is using every chance she has to rally support for
 health equity and speak out against racism. "We don't have to have all the
 answers to call for change," she says. "We just need courage."
date: 2015-11-18
tags: ["africa","big-problems","aids","disease","government","global-issues","health","health-care","inequality","illness","medical-research","medicine","race","public-health","social-change","tedmed","virus","united-states"]
slug: mary_bassett_why_your_doctor_should_care_about_social_justice
---

When I moved to Harare in 1985, social justice was at the core of Zimbabwe's national
health policy. The new government emerged from a long war of independence and immediately
proclaimed a socialist agenda: health care services, primary education became essentially
free. A massive expansion of rural health centers placed roughly 80 percent of the
population less than a two-hour walk from these facilities, a truly remarkable
accomplishment. In 1980, the year of independence, 25 percent of Zimbabwean children were
fully immunized. By 1990, a mere decade later, this proportion stood at 80 percent. I felt
tremendously privileged to be part of this transformation, a revolution. The excitement,
the camaraderie, was palpable. Working side by side with brilliant Zimbabweans —
scientists, doctors, activists — I felt connected not only to an African independence
movement, but to a global progressive public health movement. But there were daunting
challenges.

Zimbabwe reported its first AIDS case in 1985, the year I arrived. I had taken care of a
few patients with AIDS in the early 1980s, when I did my medical training at Harlem
Hospital, but — we had no idea what lay in store for Africa. Infection rate stood at about
two percent in my early days there. These would soar to one out of every four adults by
the time I left Harare 17 years later. By the mid-1990s, I'd told hundreds of people in
the prime of life that they were HIV-positive. I saw colleagues and friends die, my
students, hospital patients, die. In response, my colleagues and I set up a clinic. We did
condom demonstrations. We launched school education and workplace interventions. We did
research. We counseled the partners of infected men about how to protect themselves. We
worked hard, and at the time, I believed that I was doing my best. I was providing
excellent treatment, such as it was.

But I was not talking about structural change. Former UN Secretary Kofi Annan has spoken
candidly about his personal failure leading to the Rwandan genocide. In 1994, he was head
of the UN peacekeeping department. At a 10-year memorial for the genocide, he reflected,
"I believed at the time I was doing my best, but I realized after the genocide that there
was more I could and should have done to sound the alarm and rally support."The AIDS
epidemic caught the health community unprepared, and today, when the World Health
Organization estimates that 39 million people have lost their lives to this disease, I'm
not alone in feeling remorse and regret at not having done more earlier. But while living
in Zimbabwe, I didn't see my role as an advocacy or a political one. I was there for my
technical skills, both my clinical and my research epidemiology skills. And in my mind, my
job was to take care of patients and to do research to better understand the population
patterns of transmission, and I hoped that we'd slow the spread of the
virus.

I was aware that socially marginalized populations were at disproportionate risk of
getting and dying of AIDS. And on the sugar plantations, which really more closely
resembled feudal fiefdoms than any modern enterprise, 60 percent of pregnant women tested
HIV-positive. I worked to show how getting infected was not a moral failure but instead
related to a culture of male superiority, to forced migrant labor and to colonialism.
Whites were largely unscathed. As health professionals, our tools were pitifully weak:
imploring people to change their individual behaviors, use condoms, reduce number of
partners. Infection rates climbed, and when treatment became available in the West,
treatment that remains our most potent weapon against this virus, it was unaffordable to
the public sector across Africa. I didn't speak out about the unequal access to these
life-saving drugs or about the underlying economic and political systems that were driving
infection rates in such huge swaths of the population.

I rationalized my silence by reminding myself that I was a guest in the country, that
sounding the alarm could even get me kicked out, keep me from doing good work, taking care
of my patients, doing much-needed research. So I didn't speak out about the government's
early stance on AIDS. I didn't voice my concerns loudly enough. Many doctors, health
professionals, may think I did nothing wrong. Our pact with our patients, the Hippocratic
Oath and its variants, is about the sanctity of the patient-doctor relationship. And I did
everything I could for each and every patient of mine. But I knew that epidemics emerge
along the fissures of our society, reflecting not only biology, but more importantly
patterns of marginalization, exclusion, discrimination related to race, gender, sexuality,
class and more. It was true of AIDS. It was true just recently of Ebola. Medical
anthropologists such as Paul Farmer, who worked on AIDS in Haiti, call this structural
violence: structural because inequities are embedded in the political and economic
organization of our social world, often in ways that are invisible to those with privilege
and power; and violence because its impact — premature deaths, suffering, illness — is
violent.

We do little for our patients if we fail to recognize these social injustices. Sounding
the alarm is the first step towards doing public health right, and it's how we may rally
support to break through and create real change together. So these days, I'm not staying
quiet. I'm speaking up about a lot of things, even when it makes listeners uncomfortable,
even when it makes me uncomfortable. And a lot of this is about racial disparities and
institutionalized racism, things that we're not supposed to have in this country anymore,
certainly not in the practice of medicine or public health. But we have them, and we pay
for them in lives cut short. That's why sounding the alarm about the impact of racism on
health in the United States, the ongoing institutional and interpersonal violence that
people of color face, compounded by our tragic legacy of 250 years of slavery, 90 years of
Jim Crow and 60 years of imperfect equality, sounding the alarm about this is central to
doing my job right as New York City's Health Commissioner.

In New York City, premature mortality — that's death before the age of 65 — is 50 percent
higher for black men than white ones. A black woman in 2012 faced more than 10 times the
risk of dying related to childbirth as a white woman. And though we've made enormous
strides in reducing infant mortality rates, a black baby still faces nearly three times
the risk of death in its first year of life as compared to a white baby. New York City's
not exceptional. These statistics are paralleled by statistics found across the United
States. A recent New York Times analysis reported that there are 1.5 million missing black
men across the country. They noted that more than one out of every six black men who today
should be between the ages of 25 and 54 years have disappeared from daily life, lost
either to prison or premature death. There is great injustice in the daily and
disproportionate violence faced by young black men, the focus of recent protests under the
banner #BlackLivesMatter.

But we have to remember that enduring and disparate rates and the occurrence and outcome
of common medical conditions — heart disease, cancer, diabetes, HIV — diseases that may
kill slowly and quietly and take even more black lives prematurely. As the
#BlackLivesMatter movement unfolded, I felt frustrated and angry that the medical
community has been reluctant to even use the word "racism" in our research and our work.
You've probably felt something every time I've said it. Our medical students held die-ins
in their white coats, but the medical community has largely stood by passively as ongoing
discrimination continues to affect the disease profile and mortality. And I worry that the
trend towards personalized and precision medicine, looking for biological or genetic
targets to better tailor treatment, may inadvertently cause us to lose sight of the big
picture, that it is the daily context, where a person lives, grows, works, loves, that
most importantly determines population health, and for too many of us, poor health. As
health professionals in our daily work, whether in the clinic or doing research, we are
witness to great injustice: the homeless person who is unable to follow medical advice
because he has more pressing priorities; the transgender youth who is contemplating
suicide because our society is just so harsh; the single mother who has been made to feel
that she is responsible for the poor health of her child. Our role as health professionals
is not just to treat our patients but to sound the alarm and advocate for
change.

Rightfully or not, our societal position gives our voices great credibility, and we
shouldn't waste that. I regret not speaking up in Zimbabwe, and I've promised myself that
as New York City's Health Commissioner, I will use every opportunity I have to sound the
alarm and rally support for health equity. I will speak out against racism, and I hope you
will join me, and I will join you when you speak out against sexism or any other form of
inequality. It's time for us to rise up and collectively speak up about structural
inequality. We don't have to have all the answers to call for change. We just need
courage. The health of our patients, the health of us all, depends on it.

<!--
ad_duration=3.33
comment_count=64
event="TEDMED 2015"
external_start_time=0
has_talk_citation=0
intro_duration=11.82
is_subtitle_required="False"
is_talk_featured="True"
language="en"
language_swap="False"
native_language="en"
number_of_related_talks=6
number_of_speakers=1
number_of_subtitled_videos=22
number_of_tags=18
number_of_talk_download_languages=22
number_of_talk_more_resources=0
number_of_talk_recommendations=1
number_of_talks_take_actions=0
post_ad_duration=0.83
published_timestamp="2016-02-25 16:02:42"
recording_date="2015-11-18"
speaker_description="New York City Health Commissioner"
speaker_is_published=1
speaker_name="Mary Bassett"
talk_more_resources=[]
talk_name="Why your doctor should care about social justice"
talk_recommendations_blurb="Check out more resources on the structural inequities in public health, curated by Mary Bassett."
talks_tags=["africa","big-problems","aids","disease","government","global-issues","health","health-care","inequality","illness","medical-research","medicine","race","public-health","social-change","tedmed","virus","united-states"]
talks_take_action=[]
url_audio="https://download.ted.com/talks/MaryBassett_2015P.mp3?apikey=acme-roadrunner"
url_photo_speaker="https://pe.tedcdn.com/images/ted/8af7f2f476acb33118d38aea207d8b3792ad6e98_254x191.jpg"
url_photo_talk="https://s3.amazonaws.com/talkstar-photos/uploads/c4a3b337-2292-4725-853e-957e07c775ce/MaryBassett_2015P-embed.jpg"
url_webpage="https://www.ted.com/talks/mary_bassett_why_your_doctor_should_care_about_social_justice"
video_type_name="TED Stage Talk"
-->