---
title: Art that lets you talk back to NSA spies
speaker: Mathias Jud
description: >-
 In 2013, the world learned that the NSA and its UK equivalent, GCHQ, routinely
 spied on the German government. Amid the outrage, artists Mathias Jud and
 Christoph Wachter thought: Well, if they're listening ... let's talk to them.
 With antennas mounted on the roof of the Swiss Embassy in Berlin's government
 district, they set up an open network that let the world send messages to US and
 UK spies listening nearby. It's one of three bold, often funny, and frankly
 subversive works detailed in this talk, which highlights the world's growing
 discontent with surveillance and closed networks.
date: 2015-09-29
tags: ["art","communication","europe","government","democracy","internet","telecom","politics","security","intelligence","technology","surveillance"]
slug: mathias_jud_art_that_lets_you_talk_back_to_nsa_spies
---

A year ago, we were invited by the Swiss Embassy in Berlin to present our art projects. We
are used to invitations, but this invitation really thrilled us. The Swiss Embassy in
Berlin is special. It is the only old building in the government district that was not
destroyed during the Second World War, and it sits right next to the Federal Chancellery.
No one is closer to Chancellor Merkel than the Swiss diplomats.

The government district in Berlin also contains the Reichstag — Germany's parliament — and
the Brandenburg Gate, and right next to the gate there are other embassies, in particular
the US and the British Embassy. Although Germany is an advanced democracy, citizens are
limited in their constitutional rights in its government district. The right of assembly
and the right to demonstrate are restricted there. And this is interesting from an
artistic point of view. The opportunities to exercise participation and to express oneself
are always bound to a certain order and always subject to a specific regulation. With an
awareness of the dependencies of these regulations, we can gain a new perspective. The
given terms and conditions shape our perception, our actions and our lives. And this is
crucial in another context. Over the last couple of years, we learned that from the roofs
of the US and the British Embassy, the secret services have been listening to the entire
district, including the mobile phone of Angela Merkel.

The antennas of the British GCHQ are hidden in a white cylindrical radome, while the
listening post of the American NSA is covered by radio transparent screens. But how to
address these hidden and disguised forces? With my colleague, Christoph Wachter, we
accepted the invitation of the Swiss Embassy. And we used this opportunity to exploit the
specific situation. If people are spying on us, it stands to reason that they have to
listen to what we are saying.

On the roof of the Swiss Embassy, we installed a series of antennas. They weren't as
sophisticated as those used by the Americans and the British.

They were makeshift can antennas, not camouflaged but totally obvious and visible. The
Academy of Arts joined the project, and so we built another large antenna on their
rooftop, exactly between the listening posts of the NSA and the GCHQ.

Never have we been observed in such detail while building an art installation. A
helicopter circled over our heads with a camera registering each and every move we made,
and on the roof of the US Embassy, security officers patrolled. Although the government
district is governed by a strict police order, there are no specific laws relating to
digital communication. Our installation was therefore perfectly legal, and the Swiss
Ambassador informed Chancellor Merkel about it. We named the project "Can You Hear
Me?"

The antennas created an open and free Wi-Fi communication network in which anyone who
wanted to would be able to participate using any Wi-Fi-enabled device without any
hindrance, and be able to send messages to those listening on the frequencies that were
being intercepted. Text messages, voice chat, file sharing — anything could be sent
anonymously. And people did communicate. Over 15,000 messages were sent. Here are some
examples."Hello world, hello Berlin, hello NSA, hello GCHQ.""NSA Agents, Do the Right
Thing! Blow the whistle!""This is the NSA. In God we trust. All others we
track!!!!!"

"#@nonymous is watching #NSA #GCHQ - we are part of your organizations. # expect us. We
will #shutdown""This is the NSA's Achilles heel. Open Networks.""Agents, what twisted
story of yourself will you tell your grandchildren?""@NSA My neighbors are noisy. Please
send a drone strike."

"Make Love, Not cyberwar."We invited the embassies and the government departments to
participate in the open network, too, and to our surprise, they did. Files appeared on the
network, including classified documents leaked from the parliamentary investigation
commission, which highlights that the free exchange and discussion of vital information is
starting to become difficult, even for members of a parliament. We also organized guided
tours to experience and sound out the power constellations on-site. The tours visited the
restricted zones around the embassies, and we discussed the potential and the highlights
of communication. If we become aware of the constellation, the terms and conditions of
communication, it not only broadens our horizon, it allows us to look behind the
regulations that limit our worldview, our specific social, political or aesthetic
conventions. Let's look at an actual example.

The fate of people living in the makeshift settlements on the outskirts of Paris is hidden
and faded from view. It's a vicious circle. It's not poverty, not racism, not exclusion
that are new. What is new is how these realities are hidden and how people are made
invisible in an age of global and overwhelming communication and exchange. Such makeshift
settlements are considered illegal, and therefore those living in them don't have a chance
of making their voices heard. On the contrary, every time they appear, every time they
risk becoming visible, merely gives grounds for further persecution, expulsion and
suppression. What interested us was how we could come to know this hidden side. We were
searching for an interface and we found one. It's not a digital interface, but a physical
one: it's a hotel. We named the project "Hotel Gelem." Together with Roma families, we
created several Hotel Gelems in Europe, for example, in Freiburg in Germany, in Montreuil
near Paris, and also in the Balkans.

These are real hotels. People can stay there. But they aren't a commercial enterprise.
They are a symbol. You can go online and ask for a personal invitation to come and live
for a few days in the Hotel Gelem, in their homes, eating, working and living with the
Roma families. Here, the Roma families are not the travelers; the visitors are. Here, the
Roma families are not a minority; the visitors are. The point is not to make judgments, but
rather to find out about the context that determines these disparate and seemingly
insurmountable contradictions. In the world of globalization, the continents are drifting
closer to each other. Cultures, goods and people are in permanent exchange, but at the
same time, the gap between the world of the privileged and the world of the excluded is
growing. We were recently in Australia. For us, it was no problem to enter the country. We
have European passports, visas and air tickets.

But asylum seekers who arrive by boat in Australia are deported or taken to prison. The
interception of the boats and the disappearance of the people into the detention system
are veiled by the Australian authorities. These procedures are declared to be secret
military operations. After dramatic escapes from crisis zones and war zones, men, women
and children are detained by Australia without trial, sometimes for years. During our stay,
however, we managed to reach out and work with asylum seekers who were imprisoned, despite
strict screening and isolation. From these contexts was born an installation in the art
space of the Queensland University of Technology in Brisbane. On the face of it, it was a
very simple installation. On the floor, a stylized compass gave the direction to each
immigration detention center, accompanied by the distance and the name of the immigration
facility. But the exhibition step came in the form of connectivity. Above every floor
marking, there was a headset.

Visitors were offered the opportunity to talk directly to a refugee who was or had been
imprisoned in a specific detention facility and engage in a personal conversation. In the
protected context of the art exhibition, asylum seekers felt free to talk about
themselves, their story and their situation, without fear of consequences. Visitors
immersed themselves in long conversations about families torn apart, about dramatic
escapes from war zones, about suicide attempts, about the fate of children in detention.
Emotions ran deep. Many wept. Several revisited the exhibition. It was a powerful
experience. Europe is now facing a stream of migrants. The situation for the asylum seekers
is made worse by contradictory policies and the temptation of militarized responses. We
have also established communication systems in remote refugee centers in Switzerland and
Greece. They are all about providing basic information — weather forecasts, legal
information, guidance. But they are significant.

Information on the Internet that could ensure survival along dangerous routes is being
censored, and the provision of such information is becoming increasingly criminalized. This
brings us back to our network and to the antennas on the roof of the Swiss Embassy in
Berlin and the "Can You Hear Me?" project. We should not take it for granted to be
boundlessly connected. We should start making our own connections, fighting for this idea
of an equal and globally interconnected world. This is essential to overcome our
speechlessness and the separation provoked by rival political forces. It is only in truly
exposing ourselves to the transformative power of this experience that we can overcome
prejudice and exclusion. Thank you.

Bruno Giussani: Thank you, Mathias. The other half of your artistic duo is also here.
Christoph Wachter, come onstage.

First, tell me just a detail: the name of the hotel is not a random name. Gelem means
something specific in the Roma language. Mathias Jud: Yes, "Gelem, Gelem" is the title of
the Romani hymn, the official, and it means "I went a long way."BG: That's just to add the
detail to your talk. But you two traveled to the island of Lesbos very recently, you're
just back a couple of days ago, in Greece, where thousands of refugees are arriving and
have been arriving over the last few months. What did you see there and what did you do
there? Christoph Wachter: Well, Lesbos is one of the Greek islands close to Turkey, and
during our stay, many asylum seekers arrived by boat on overcrowded dinghies, and after
landing, they were left completely on their own. They are denied many services. For
example, they are not allowed to buy a bus ticket or to rent a hotel room, so many
families literally sleep in the streets.

And we installed networks there to allow basic communication, because I think, I believe,
it's not only that we have to speak about the refugees, I think we need to start talking
to them. And by doing so, we can realize that it is about human beings, about their lives
and their struggle to survive. BG: And allow them to talk as well. Christoph, thank you for
coming to TED. Mathias, thank you for coming to TED and sharing your story.

<!--
ad_duration=3.33
comment_count=38
event="TEDGlobal>London"
external_start_time=0
intro_duration=11.82
is_subtitle_required="False"
is_talk_featured="True"
language="en"
language_swap="False"
native_language="en"
number_of_related_talks=6
number_of_speakers=1
number_of_subtitled_videos=23
number_of_tags=12
number_of_talk_download_languages=23
number_of_talk_more_resources=0
number_of_talk_recommendations=0
number_of_talks_take_actions=0
post_ad_duration=0.83
published_timestamp="2015-10-29 14:52:41"
recording_date="2015-09-29"
speaker_description="Artist"
speaker_is_published=1
speaker_name="Mathias Jud"
talk_name="Art that lets you talk back to NSA spies"
talks_tags=["art","communication","europe","government","democracy","internet","telecom","politics","security","intelligence","technology","surveillance"]
url_audio="https://download.ted.com/talks/MathiasJud_2015G.mp3?apikey=acme-roadrunner"
url_photo_speaker="https://pe.tedcdn.com/images/ted/06f721367539f7713827fdc6dd4e833c9560e835_254x191.jpg"
url_photo_talk="https://s3.amazonaws.com/talkstar-photos/uploads/e00065f3-1d1a-4a86-8ad2-3f4326f3eb3b/MathiasJud_2015G-embed.jpg"
url_webpage="https://www.ted.com/talks/mathias_jud_art_that_lets_you_talk_back_to_nsa_spies"
video_type_name="TED Stage Talk"
-->