---
title: Addiction is a disease. We should treat it like one
speaker: Michael Botticelli
description: >-
 Only one in nine people in the United States gets the care and treatment they
 need for addiction and substance abuse. A former Director of National Drug
 Control Policy, Michael Botticelli is working to end this epidemic and treat
 people with addictions with kindness, compassion and fairness. In a personal,
 thoughtful talk, he encourages the millions of Americans in recovery today to
 make their voices heard and confront the stigma associated with substance use
 disorders.
date: 2016-10-21
tags: ["addiction","communication","humanity","community","disease","government","identity","policy","law","public-health","social-change","self","society","tedx","hiv","lgbt"]
slug: michael_botticelli_addiction_is_a_disease_we_should_treat_it_like_one
---

Twenty-eight years ago, I was a broken man. And you probably wouldn't be able to tell that
if you met me. I had a good job at a well-respected academic institution. I dressed well,
of course. But my insides were rotting away. You see, I grew up in a family riddled with
addiction, and as a kid, I also struggled with coming to terms with my own sexuality. And
even though I couldn't name it then, growing up as a gay kid just compounded my issues of
isolation and insecurities. But drinking took all of that away. Like many, I drank at an
early age. I continued to drink my way through college. And when I finally did come out in
the early 1980s, about the only places to meet other gay people, to socialize, to be
yourself, were gay bars. And what do you do in gay bars? You drink. And I did — a lot. My
story is not unique. Like millions of Americans, my disease progressed undiagnosed. It
took me to people and places and things that I never would have chosen.

It wasn't until an intersection with the law gave me an "opportunity" to get care, that I
began my journey of recovery. My journey of recovery has been filled with love and with
joy, but it hasn't been without pain. Like many of you, I've lost too many friends and
family to this disease. I've heard too many heartbreaking stories of people who've lost
loved ones to addiction. And I've also lost countless friends to HIV and AIDS.Our current
opioid epidemic and the AIDS epidemic tragically have much in common. Right now, we are in
the midst of one of the greatest health crises of our time. During 2014 alone, 28,000
people died of drug overdoses associated with prescription drugs and heroin. During the
1980s, scores of people were dying from HIV and AIDS. Public officials ignored it. Some
wouldn't even utter the words. They didn't want treatment. And tragically, there are many
parallels with our current epidemic. Some called it the gay plague. They called for
quarantines.

They wanted to separate the innocent victims from the rest of us. I was afraid we were
losing this battle because people were blaming us for being sick. Public policy was being
held hostage by stigma and fear, and also held hostage were compassion, care, research,
recovery and treatment. But we changed all that. Because out of the pain of those deaths,
we saw a social and political movement. AIDS galvanized us into action; to stand up, to
speak up and to act out. And it also galvanized the LGBT movement. We knew we were in a
battle for our lives because silence equaled death, but we changed, and we made things
happen. And right now, we have the potential to see the end of HIV/AIDS in our lifetime.
These changes came in no small part by the courageous, yet simple decision for people to
come out to their neighbors, to their friends, to their families and to their
coworkers. Years ago, I was a volunteer for the Names Project.

This was an effort started by Cleve Jones in San Francisco to show that people who died of
AIDS had names and faces and families and people who loved them. I still recall unfolding
the AIDS memorial quilt on the National Mall on a brilliant day in October, 1988.So fast
forward to 2015. The Supreme Court's decision to strike down the ban on same-sex marriage.
My husband, Dave, and I walk over to the steps of the Supreme Court to celebrate that
decision with so many other people, and I couldn't help but think how far we came around
LGBT rights and yet how far we needed to go around issues of addiction. When I was
nominated by President Obama to be his Director of Drug Policy, I was very open about my
recovery and about the fact that I was a gay man. And at no point during my confirmation
process — at least that I know of — did the fact that I was a gay man come to bear on my
candidacy or my fitness to do this job. But my addiction did.

At one point, a congressional staffer said that there was no way that I was going to be
confirmed by the United States Senate because of my past, despite the fact that I had been
in recovery for over 20 years, and despite the fact that this job takes a little bit of
knowledge around addiction.

So, you know, this is the stigma that people with substance use disorders face every
single day, and you know, I have to tell you it's still why I'm more comfortable coming
out as a gay man than I am as a person with a history of addiction. Nearly every family in
America is affected by addiction. Yet, unfortunately, too often, it's not talked about
openly and honestly. It's whispered about. It's met with derision and scorn. We hear these
stories, time and time again, on TV, online, we hear it from public officials, and we hear
it from family and friends. And those of us with an addiction, we hear those voices, and
somehow we believe that we are less deserving of care and treatment. Today in the United
States, only one in nine people get care and treatment for their disorder. One in nine.
Think about that. Generally, people with other diseases get care and treatment. If you have
cancer, you get treatment, if you have diabetes, you get treatment.

If you have a heart attack, you get emergency services, and you get referred to care. But
somehow people with addiction have to wait for treatment or often can't get when they need
it. And left untreated, addiction has significant, dire consequences. And for many people
that means death or incarceration. We've been down that road before. For too long our
country felt like we could arrest our way out of this problem. But we know that we can't.
Decades of scientific research has shown that this is a medical issue — that this is a
chronic medical condition that people inherit and that people develop. So the Obama
administration has taken a different tack on drug policy. We've developed and implemented
a comprehensive plan to expand prevention services, treatment services, early intervention
and recovery support. We've pushed criminal justice reform. We've knocked down barriers to
give people second chances.

We see public health and public safety officials working hand in hand at the community
level. We see police chiefs across the country guiding people to treatment instead of jail
and incarceration. We see law enforcement and other first responders reversing overdoses
with naloxone to give people a second chance for care. The Affordable Care Act is the
biggest expansion of substance use disorder treatment in a generation, and it also calls
for the integration of treatment services within primary care. But fundamentally, all of
this work is not enough. Unless we change the way that we view people with addiction in
the United States. Years ago when I finally understood that I had a problem and I knew that
I needed help, I was too afraid to ask for it. I felt that people would think I was
stupid, that I was weak-willed, that I was morally flawed. But I talk about my recovery
because I want to make change. I want us to see that we need to be open and candid about
who we are and what we can do.

I am public about my own recovery not to be self-congratulatory. I am open about my own
recovery to change public opinion, to change public policy and to change the course of
this epidemic and empower the millions of Americans who struggle with this journey to be
open and candid about who they are. People are more than their disease. And all of us have
the opportunity to change public opinion and to change public policy. All of us know
someone who has an addiction, and all of us can do our part to change how we view people
with addiction in the United States. So when you see someone with an addiction, don't
think of a drunk or a junkie or an addict or an abuser — see a person; offer them help;
give them kindness and compassion. And together, we can be part of a growing movement in
the United States to change how we view people with addiction. Together we can change
public policy. We can ensure that people get care when they need it, just like any other
disease.

We can be part of a growing, unstoppable movement to have millions of Americans enter
recovery, and put an end to this epidemic. Thank you very much.

<!--
ad_duration=3.33
comment_count=68
event="TEDxMidAtlantic"
external_start_time=0
has_talk_citation=1
intro_duration=11.82
is_subtitle_required="False"
is_talk_featured="True"
language="en"
language_swap="False"
native_language="en"
number_of_related_talks=6
number_of_speakers=1
number_of_subtitled_videos=22
number_of_tags=16
number_of_talk_download_languages=22
number_of_talk_more_resources=0
number_of_talk_recommendations=1
number_of_talks_take_actions=0
post_ad_duration=0.83
published_timestamp="2017-03-29 15:01:11"
recording_date="2016-10-21"
speaker_description="Drug policy expert"
speaker_is_published=1
speaker_name="Michael Botticelli"
talk_more_resources=[]
talk_name="Addiction is a disease. We should treat it like one"
talk_recommendations_blurb="Check out these extra resources on addiction and recovery, curated by Michael Botticelli."
talks_tags=["addiction","communication","humanity","community","disease","government","identity","policy","law","public-health","social-change","self","society","tedx","hiv","lgbt"]
talks_take_action=[]
url_audio="https://download.ted.com/talks/MichaelBotticelli_2016X.mp3?apikey=acme-roadrunner"
url_photo_speaker="https://pe.tedcdn.com/images/ted/ce08394fa6ffded7a9565a834b8954922e29df90_254x191.jpg"
url_photo_talk="https://s3.amazonaws.com/talkstar-photos/uploads/1b68130a-4982-425d-9537-65894ca786e0/MichaelBotticelli_2016X-embed.jpg"
url_webpage="https://www.ted.com/talks/michael_botticelli_addiction_is_a_disease_we_should_treat_it_like_one"
video_type_name="TEDx Talk"
-->