---
title: Cheap, effective shelter for disaster relief
speaker: Michael McDaniel
description: >-
 Michael McDaniel designed housing for disaster relief zones -- inexpensive, easy
 to transport, even beautiful – but found that no one was willing to build it.
 Persistent and obsessed, he decided to go it alone. At TEDxAustin, McDaniel show
 us his Exo Reaction Housing Solution, and asks us to prepare for the next natural
 disaster.
date: 2012-02-11
tags: ["tedx","design","disaster-relief","global-issues","natural-disaster"]
slug: michael_mcdaniel_cheap_effective_shelter_for_disaster_relief
---

So, I'm going to start off with kind of the buzzkill a little bit. Forty-two million
people were displaced by natural disasters in 2010. Now, there was nothing particularly
special about 2010, because, on average, 31 and a half million people are displaced by
natural disasters every single year. Now, usually when people hear statistics or stats
like that, you start thinking about places like Haiti or other kind of exotic or maybe
even impoverished areas, but it happens right here in the United States every single year.
Last year alone, 99 federally declared disasters were on file with FEMA, from Joplin,
Missouri, and Tuscaloosa, Alabama, to the Central Texas wildfires that just happened
recently. Now, how does the most powerful country in the world handle these displaced
people? They cram them onto cots, put all your personal belongings in a plastic garbage
bag, stick it underneath, and put you on the floor of an entire sports arena, or a
gymnasium. So obviously there's a massive housing gap, and this really upset me, because
academia tells you after a major disaster, there's typically about an 18-month time frame
to — we kinda recover, start the recovery process, but what most people don't realize is
that on average it takes 45 to 60 days or more for the infamous FEMA trailers to even
begin to show up.

Before that time, people are left to their own devices. So I became obsessed with trying to
figure out a way to actually fill this gap. This actually became my creative obsession. I
put aside all my freelance work after hours and started just focusing particularly on this
problem. So I started sketching. Two days after Katrina, I started sketching and sketching
and trying to brainstorm up ideas or solutions for this, and as things started to congeal
or ideas started to form, I started sketching digitally on the computer, but it was an
obsession, so I couldn't just stop there. I started experimenting, making models, talking
to experts in the field, taking their feedback, and refining, and I kept on refining and
refining for nights and weekends for over five years. Now, my obsession ended up driving me
to create full-size prototypes in my own backyard — 

— and actually spending my own personal savings on everything from tooling to patents and
a variety of other costs, but in the end I ended up with this modular housing system that
can react to any situation or disaster. It can be put up in any environment, from an
asphalt parking lot to pastures or fields, because it doesn't require any special setup or
specialty tools. Now, at the foundation and kind of the core of this whole system is the
Exo Housing Unit, which is just the individual shelter module. And though it's light,
light enough that you can actually lift it by hand and move it around, and it actually
sleeps four people. And you can arrange these things as kind of more for encampments and
more of a city grid type layout, or you can circle the wagons, essentially, and form these
circular pods out of them, which give you this semi-private communal area for people to
actually spill out into so they're not actually trapped inside these units. Now this
fundamentally changes the way we respond to disasters, because gone are the horrid
conditions inside a sports arena or a gymnasium, where people are crammed on these cots
inside.

Now we have instant neighborhoods outside. So the Exo is designed to be simply, basically
like a coffee cup. They can actually stack together so we get extremely efficient
transportation and storage out of them. In fact, 15 Exos can fit on a single semi truck by
itself. This means the Exo can actually be transported and set up faster than any other
housing option available today. But I'm obsessive, so I couldn't just stop there, so I
actually started modifying the bunks where you could actually slide out the bunks and
slide in desks or shelving, so the same unit can now be used for an office or storage
location. The doors can actually swap out, so you can actually put on a rigid panel with a
window unit in it for climate control, or a connector module that would allow you to
actually connect multiple units together, which gives you larger and kind of
compartmentalized living spaces, so now this same kit of parts, this same unit can
actually serve as a living room, bedroom or bathroom, or an office, a living space and
secure storage. Sounds like a great idea, but how do you make it real?

So the first idea I had, initially, was just to go the federal and state governments and
go, "Here, take it, for free." But I was quickly told that, "Boy, our government doesn't
really work like that." 

Okay. Okay. So maybe I would start a nonprofit to kind of help consult and get this idea
going along with the government, but then I was told, "Son, our government looks to
private sector for things like this." Okay. So maybe I would take this whole idea and go
to private corporations that would have this mutually shared benefit to it, but I was
quickly told by some corporations that my personal passion project was not a brand fit
because they didn't want their logos stamped across the ghettos of Haiti. Now, I wasn't
just obsessed. I was outraged. (Laughter.) So I decided, kind of told myself, "Oh yeah?
Watch this. I'll do it myself." 

Now, this quickly, my day job sent me to work out of our Milan office for a few months, so
I was like, what will I do? So I actually scheduled sleep on my calendar, and spent the
8-hour time difference on conference calls with material suppliers, manufacturers and
potential customers. And we found through this whole process, we found this great little
manufacturer in Virginia, and if his body language is any indication, that's the owner —

— of what it's like for a manufacturer to work directly with a designer, you've got to see
what happens here. 

But G.S. Industries was fantastic. They actually built three prototypes for us by hand. So
now we have prototypes that can show that four people can actually sleep securely and much
more comfortably than a tent could ever provide. And they actually shipped them here to
Texas for us. Now, a funny thing started happening. Other people started to believe in
what we were doing, and actually offered us hangar space, donated hangar space to us. And
then the Georgetown Airport Authority was bent over backwards to help us with anything we
needed. So now we had a hangar space to work in, and prototypes to demo with. So in one
year, we've negotiated manufacturing agreements, been awarded one patent, filed our second
patent, talked to multiple people, demoed this to FEMA and its consultants to rave
reviews, and then started talking to some other people who requested information, this
little group called the United Nations.

And on top of that, now we have a whole plethora of other individuals that have come up
and started to talk to us from doing it for mining camps, mobile youth hostels, right down
to the World Cup and the Olympics. So, in closing, on this whole thing here is hopefully
very soon we will not have to respond to these painful phone calls that we get after
disasters where we don't really have anything to sell or give you yet. Hopefully very soon
we will be there, because we are destined, obsessed with making it real. Thank you.

<!--
ad_duration=3.33
event="TEDxAustin"
external_start_time=0
intro_duration=11.82
is_subtitle_required="False"
is_talk_featured="True"
language="en"
language_swap="False"
native_language="en"
number_of_related_talks=6
number_of_speakers=1
number_of_subtitled_videos=25
number_of_tags=5
number_of_talk_download_languages=25
number_of_talk_more_resources=0
number_of_talk_recommendations=0
number_of_talks_take_actions=0
post_ad_duration=0.83
published_timestamp="2012-05-19 14:01:48"
recording_date="2012-02-11"
speaker_description="Graphic designer"
speaker_is_published=1
speaker_name="Michael McDaniel"
speaker_what_others_say="His project is a nice reminder that better ways of doing things are out there."
talk_name="Cheap, effective shelter for disaster relief"
talks_tags=["tedx","design","disaster-relief","global-issues","natural-disaster"]
url_audio="https://download.ted.com/talks/MichaelMcDaniel_2012X.mp3?apikey=acme-roadrunner"
url_photo_speaker="https://pe.tedcdn.com/images/ted/9095a1d8cd87ade23965de58b018aa9acc7479ad_254x191.jpg"
url_photo_talk="https://pe.tedcdn.com/images/ted/a67b6df627d849134cbd273e1e2cdbb41b652b53_1600x1200.jpg"
url_webpage="https://www.ted.com/talks/michael_mcdaniel_cheap_effective_shelter_for_disaster_relief"
video_type_name="TEDx Talk"
-->