---
title: Creativity builds nations
speaker: Muthoni Drummer Queen
description: >-
 In a hopeful talk followed by an empowering performance, musician and TED Fellow
 Muthoni Drummer Queen shares how industries like music, film and fashion provide
 a platform for Africans to broadcast their rich and diverse talents -- and
 explains how the shared experience of creativity can replace attitudes of
 exclusionism and othering with acceptance and self-love.
date: 2019-04-15
tags: ["performance","music","art","africa","culture","creativity","future","live-music","ted-fellows"]
slug: muthoni_drummer_queen_creativity_builds_nations
---

Between 2004 and 2008, I unsuccessfully tried to get into the Kenyan music industry. But
the recurring answer from producers was I was not Kenyan enough. Meaning what? I didn't
sing fully in the slang derivative of Kiswahili and I didn't sing enough party tracks, so
they said Kenyans wouldn't listen to a Kenyan who sounded like me. This idea of otherism,
the exclusion of a person based on their perceived deviation from the norms, goes to the
root of the problems in Kenya. And it runs deep. Kenya was invented by colonialists in
1895, and with it, came the erasure of our identity and the class system built on
otherism. So by 1963, when we received our independence, these ideas had already become
the new normal. Now, we've tried a lot of different ways to move forward since. We have a
common language, currency, infrastructure, basically all the things that make a country a
country. But all these efforts at nation-building do not go to the heart of the
matter.

Which is this: we cannot build what we do not truly love. And we cannot love until we love
ourselves. The thing we have to heal, us Kenyans, is our lack of self-love, our deep
self-hate and our existential identity crisis. And this is the work of nation-building
that only the creative industry can do. The idea that Kenya can only include some of us led
me to found a music festival in 2008 called Blankets and Wine, to give a platform to
myself and other misfits. Ten years later, we've programmed over 200 bands and put at
least 100,000 dollars directly into the hands of artists and managers, who have in turn
spent it on technicians, rehearsals, music videos and other things along the music value
chain. Our platform has allowed for multiple Kenyan identities to exist, while inspiring
the industry to discover and engage the wide variety of Kenyan music. What we do is
necessary but insufficient.

And we must urgently pivot into a live music circuit. But there are other ways music can
help heal the nation. According to a 2018 state of media report, traditional radio is sill
by far the biggest distributor of ideas in Kenya, with 47 percent of Kenyans still
choosing radio first. This presents an opportunity. We can use radio to help Kenyans hear
the diversity that is Kenya. We can reserve 60 percent of all programing on Kenyan radio
for Kenyan music. We can break down ethnic barriers by playing Kenyan music done in
English, Kiswahili and other ethnic languages, on what is now single-language ethnic
radio. Radio can help stimulate interest and demand for Kenyan music by Kenyans, while
also providing the much-needed incomes by way of royalties. But more importantly, radio
can help us build a more inclusive narrative about Kenya. For you cannot love what you do
not know exists. Other creative industries too can do the work.

When you consider that 41 percent of Kenyans still choose TV as their primary medium, it's
obvious that film has a huge potential. The meager resources that have been put into the
sector have already produced world-class acts, like Lupita Nyong'o and Wanuri Kahiu, but
we are going to need a lot more incentives and investments to make filming in Kenya
easier, so more Kenyan stories can get on the Kenyan TV and spark off the really difficult
conversations we need to have with one another. We're going to need to grow a lot more
home-grown stars, so we can reverse the idea that we have to blow up abroad before we get
the acceptance and validation of home. Fashion too can do the work. We need to make it
possible to affordably mass-produce Kenyan clothes for Kenyan consumers, so we don't all
have to rely on second-hand imports. The first running shoe made in Kenya needs to be a
local and global success as an ode to Kenyan excellence, epitomized by Kenyan runners, who
are literally world-class.

For these ideas to come to life, jobs will be created, and Kenyan ideas will be exported.
But more importantly, Kenyans may finally consider themselves worthy of the love that we
reserve for others. Kenya's creative industry is dynamic, cosmopolitan, forward-looking,
and without a doubt, a true manufacturing industry of the immediate future. But its true
power lies in its ability to help heal the psyche of Kenya, so we can finally build a
nation for real. Thank you.

For this song, I'd like us all to take a minute and think about immigrant communities, and
especially refugee immigrant communities, and the daily struggle they have to endure,
building a life with dignity and meaning away from everything they have loved and known.
If you feel any empathy for this idea, I ask to see your fist up in the air with
me.

"Million voice."The mandem make some noiseWith a million, million voiceAll the mandem make
some noiseWith a million, million voiceCan't stop I, won't stop IWith a million, million
voiceCan't stop I, won't stop IWith a million, million voiceThis one dedicated to my
people building somethingWorking hard to make sure that their children will lack for
nothingWhen them people come around and treat them like they're basicI just want to LOL
and tell them to consider all their optionsCaution, natural distortionYou can't even kill
us we survive even abortionSay we cannot make it, watch us how we make itWatch us in a
minute come and run and overtake itTED, clap!Can't have enough of itThis our only way of
lifeKeeping, keeping on the grindTED, will you clap like this. Can't have enough of itThis
our only way of lifeKeeping, keeping on the grindKeeping, keeping on the grindThe mandem
make some noiseLike a million, million voiceAll the mandem make some noiseWith a million,
million voiceCan't stop I, won't stop IWith a million, million voiceCan't stop I, won't
stop IWith a million, million voiceCan I be your leaderCan I be your CaesarIf I show you
how to make some more will you pledge allegianceIs it always eitherMe or you or neitherIf
I show you where I'm coming from, will you take a breather? Cos what you'll find — what
you'll findWhat you'll find guarantee will blow your mind!I'll blow your mind — I'll blow
your mindAnd then you'll see the reason I stay on my grindWould you clap!Can't have enough
of itIt's our only way of lifeKeeping, keeping on the grindKeeping, keeping on the
grindCan't have enough of itIt's our only way of lifeKeeping, keeping on the grindKeeping,
keeping on the grindThe mandem make some noise

This next one is partly in Kiswahili, which is what we speak in Kenya. And it's about
female friendship and female power. And girls coming together to build something that
lasts, a true legacy and intergenerational worth."Suzie Noma."(Drum music)Sitting at the
cornerMe and Suzie NomaWe ain't got no worries we are looking like the ownersSipping on
CoronasLooking at the phone asAll them pretty boys come and tell us how they want usMambo
ni kungoja, aki mtangojaSinaga matime za kuwaste na viojaPlanning how we want to take over
the world soonRiding on the drums and the clap while the bass goesHey! Shake it down shake
it down likeWait till you, wait till you see myHey! Shake it down shake it down likeWait
till you, wait till you see myIf you really know it and you really wanna show itBe the way
to goGo and grab somebody, move your body, show somebodyBe the way to goOn this I know,
all this I know, all this I knowOn this I know, all this I know, all this I
knowIyo!Scheming at the cornerMe and Suzie NomaWe ain't got no money but we do it how we
wannaPainting our nails checking our mails asAll them pretty boys wanna have us but they
fail likeAki mtangoja, leo mtangojaSaa hii tukoworks hakunaga za viojaPlanning how we want
to take over the world soonRiding on the drums and the clap while the bass goes boomShake
it down shake it down likeWait till you, wait till you see myHey! Shake it down shake it
down likeWait till you, wait till you see myIf you really know it and you really wanna
show itBe the way to goGo and grab somebody, move your body, show somebodyBe the way to
goOn this I know, all this I know, all this I knowOn this I know, all this I know, all
this I knowAnd now you whine your waistAnd now you screw your faceExaggerate your
waistResuscitate the placeNa wale wako fifty fifty comsiNa wale wako fiti pia sisiTuko tu
sawa mdogo mdogo yaaniHallelu-yawa tumeiva designIf you really know it, and you really
wanna show itBe the way to goGo and grab somebody, move your body, show somebodyBe the way
to goOn this I know, all this I know, all this I knowOn this I know, all this I know, all
this I knowIyo!

<!--
ad_duration=3.33
comment_count=7
event="TED2019"
external_start_time=0
intro_duration=11.82
is_subtitle_required="False"
is_talk_featured="True"
language="en"
language_swap="False"
native_language="en"
number_of_related_talks=6
number_of_speakers=1
number_of_subtitled_videos=13
number_of_tags=9
number_of_talk_download_languages=13
number_of_talk_more_resources=0
number_of_talk_recommendations=0
number_of_talks_take_actions=0
post_ad_duration=0.83
published_timestamp="2019-09-27 16:16:40"
recording_date="2019-04-15"
speaker_description="Musician"
speaker_is_published=1
speaker_name="Muthoni Drummer Queen"
talk_name="Creativity builds nations"
talks_tags=["performance","music","art","africa","culture","creativity","future","live-music","ted-fellows"]
url_photo_speaker="https://pe.tedcdn.com/images/ted/4f2e17469c68c7dac1f333830365ee9f4dfb83b5_254x191.jpg"
url_photo_talk="https://s3.amazonaws.com/talkstar-photos/uploads/fad1c1b6-af69-46d8-af12-c17f590718a1/MuthoniDrummerQueen_2019U-embed.jpg"
url_webpage="https://www.ted.com/talks/muthoni_drummer_queen_creativity_builds_nations"
video_type_name="TED Stage Talk"
-->