---
title: The necessity of normalizing queer love
speaker: Panti Bliss
description: >-
 The public displays of affection that straight couples take for granted every day
 can be outright dangerous for queer couples to practice -- what do you do when
 simply holding hands with a loved one can be considered a political act? Irish
 activist Panti Bliss shares what it's like to navigate such a world and
 highlights the importance of normalizing queer love in public spaces.
date: 2014-09-13
tags: ["lgbt","love","social-change","relationships","global-issues"]
slug: panti_bliss_the_necessity_of_normalizing_queer_love
---

Hi! Hi! I am forty-five years old. I know I look amazing, thank you. 

I am forty-five years old and I have never once unselfconsciously held hands with a lover
in public. I am forty-five years old and I have never once casually, comfortably,
carelessly held hands with a partner in public. I don't know how many of you can even
imagine what that might be like because, of course, it's a small thing, isn't it, holding
hands with a lover in public? And it's not that nobody wanted to, it's just that we didn't
feel comfortable. Now, like many gay people, when I was younger, in my young life, I
struggled at one time against being gay. I didn't want to be different. I didn't want to
be this thing that I didn't really understand. This thing that I had learned was shameful
or jokeworthy. But when I eventually did sort of understand and come to accept who and
what I am, I have never since that moment, never once, have I ever wished that it turned
out differently! I am thoroughly, deeply, delightedly, happy to be gay!

It suits me! 

I am really good at it! 

And yet, everyday I am jealous of straight people, because that private, little, small,
intimate gesture of affection has never once been mine. Everyday I see young, straight
couples walking through the park and they are casually holding hands and I am jealous of
them! I see a teenage couple at a bus stop and she is leaning into him, and her hand is in
his, and both of their hands are tucked into his jacket pocket for warmth, and I am
jealous of that teenage couple! I will sometimes see a man who unconsciously put his hand,
a protective arm, around his girlfriend and she'll link her fingers through his, and I am
jealous of that! Maybe you're on Grafton Street and you see an older lady and she gestures
to draw her husband's attention to something in the window, and without even thinking he
just takes her hand and they stand there peering into the window discussing whatever it is
that drew their attention and their hands are just carelessly joined together, and I am
jealous of that! Because gay people do not get to hold hands in public without first
considering the risk.

Gay people do not get to put an arm through another arm or put a hand on a boyfriend's
waist without first considering what the possible consequences might be. We look around to
see: where are we, who's around, is it late at night? What kind of area is it? Are there
bored teenagers hanging around looking for amusement? Are there bunches of lads standing
outside a pub? And if we decided OK, maybe it is, it's OK, well then we do hold hands, but
the thing is that now those hands are not casual and thoughtless. They are now considered
and weighed. But we stroll on hand in hand trying to be just normal and carefree just like
everybody else, but actually we're not! Because we are constantly scanning the pavement
ahead, just in case. And then even if we do see, you know, a group of blokes coming
towards us, maybe we will decide sort of silently to continue holding hands, defiantly!
But now our small, intimate gesture between two people in love is no longer a small,
intimate gesture.

It is a political act of defiance, and it has been ruined. And anyway then you sort of
think: "Well, we've had such a lovely afternoon poking around in that garden center
looking at things for the garden we don't actually have." 

And then you think, all it will take is one spat "faggots" or a split lip to turn that
really lovely afternoon into a bad afternoon that you will never want to remember. And
even if you are somewhere where you think: "Ah, it's perfectly fine here. Nobody here is
going to react badly to our tiny gesture." You know, I don't know, say you're wandering
through a posh department store. Even then people will notice. Now, they may only notice
because they're thinking: "Isn't nice to see two gays holding hands in public?" But they
still notice, and I don't want them to notice because then our small, intimate, private,
little, human gesture has been turned into a statement, and I don't want that! Our little,
private, gesture, like Schrödinger's cat, is altered simply by being observed. We live in
this sort of homophobic world, and you might think that a small, little thing like holding
hands in public, "Well, it's just a small thing," and you're right! It is indeed just a
small thing.

But it is one of many small things that make us human, and there are lots of small things
everyday that LGBT people have to put up with, that other people don't have to put up
with. Lots of small things that we have to put up with in order to be safe or not to be
the object of ridicule or scorn. And we are expected to put up with those things and just
thank our blessings that we don't live in a country where we could be imprisoned or
executed for being gay. And we are so used to making those small adjustments everyday,
that even now we rarely ourselves even notice that we are doing it, because it is just
part of the background of our lives. This constant malign presence that we have
assimilated, and if we complain about it, we are told we have nothing to complain about
because: "Aren't you lucky that you don't live in Uganda?" And yes, I am lucky that I
don't live in Uganda, but that's not good enough! This isn't some sort of game or
competition where the person who has it the worst wins the right to complain and everybody
else has to just put up or shut up.

Our society is homophobic! It is infused with homophobia. It is dripping with homophobia.
And when you are forty-five years old and you have spent thirty years putting up, thirty
years absorbing all of those small slights and intimidations and sneers and occasionally
much worse, you just get tired of it. You get fed up putting up. I am fed up of reading
yet another article by yet another straight person explaining why I am less somehow than
everybody else. You get fed up listening to people describe you as intrinsically
disordered, people who don't even know you, from their celibate pulpits. You get fed up of
the scrawled graffiti, and you get fed up of people sneeringly describe things as gay. You
get fed up of steeling yourself to pass by the Saturday night drunks hoping that they
won't notice you, and you get fed up of people using their time and energies and talents
to campaign against you being treated just like every other citizen.

I'm forty-five and I'm fed up putting up. Now I would, of course, prefer if nobody
harbored any animosity towards gay people or any discomfort with gay relationships, but,
you know, I can live with the kind of small, personal, private homophobia that some people
might have. For example, I can live with Mary in Wicklow who sometimes turns on the
television and sees Graham Norton and thinks, "Oh, he seems nice enough but does he have
to be so gay?" 

I can live with that. I can live with Mary who doesn't know any gay people, apart from
that fella who does her hair once a month in "Curl Up and Dye". 

Mary, whose only knowledge of gay people and our relationships comes from what she has
gleaned from schoolyards, church and Coronation Street. I can live with that. I would be
happy to sit down on the sofa and watch Coronation Street with Mary. I would be happy to
have a cup of tea with her and discuss with her why she feels a little uncomfortable with
gay relationships and I would hope that Mary would change her mind. I would hope that she
would meet more gay people and find out pretty quickly that we are just as ordinary, just
as nice or just as annoying as all of you people are. And I would hope that she would
change her mind for her own sake as much as anybody else's, because gay people are just as
capable of bringing goodness into Mary's life as anybody else. And, of course, we could
help her with the decorating! 

But that kind of personal discomfort with gay people and their relationships is entirely
different from the kind of homophobia that manifests itself in public. The kind of
homophobia that manifests itself in an attempt to have LGBT people treated differently or
less than everybody else. The kind of homophobia that seeks to characterize gay people and
their relationships as less worthy of respect. That kind of homophobia I do have a problem
with, and I think gay people should be allowed to call it when they see it, because it is
our right to do so! Of course, many people object to the word homophobia itself. They
object to the "phobia" part. 'I'm not afraid of you," they say. 

But I'm not saying that homophobes cower in fear every time they pass a Cher album,

but they are afraid. They are afraid of what the world will look like when it treats gay,
lesbian and bisexual people with the same respect as everybody else. They are afraid that
they won't fit in this brave new world of equality. But, of course, their fear is
irrational because, of course, the world will not look any different. Kids will still want
to eat ice cream, dogs will still play fetch, the tide will still come in, and parallel
parking will still be difficult. 

The most vocal homophobes who know that they long ago lost the arguments around the
decriminalization of homosexual sex or every other advance for gay people since. These
days you will find those very vocal homophobes clustered around the same-sex marriage
debate — and it is quite the spectacle because, of course, they know that they can't just
come right out and bluntly say what drives them, which is an animus towards gay people,
and a disgust at what they imagine we do in bed, because they know that that won't wash
with the general public anymore. So they are forced to sort of scramble for any other
reason that they can think of to argue their case. So, gay people are going to destroy the
institution of marriage, gay couples will be wandering through orphanages picking babies
off shelves trying to find one that matches their new IKEA sofa. 

Or that allowing gay people to get married will destroy society itself, and many, many
more including my own personal favorite, which is the old argument that the word
"marriage" is defined in some dictionary as a union between a man and a woman, and that
therefore same-sex marriage can't possibly be a "marriage". Which is a piffling argument
against words and dictionaries and not an argument against same-sex marriage.

Now, of course, the other real driver of homophobia, and you can all clutch your pearls
here because I am going to go here, is a disgust with gay sex, in particular with gay male
sex. The poor old lesbians just get caught in the homophobic crossfire.

You know guilty by association. Because what they really don't like is anal sex, sodomy,
you know, buggery, and they assume that that is all we do. They feverishly imagine that we
spend all day jumping around buggering each other. I mean they obsess on it, and, in fact,
what they actually do, is reduce us down to this one sex act, whether or not we do it at
all, because we are not regular people with the same hopes and aspirations and ambitions
and feelings as everyone else, we are simply walking sex acts. Earlier this year I was
invited to take part in the St. Pat's for All parade in Queens, New York. Now it is a
really lovely, charming, grassroots event in Queens which was set up in response to the
ban on gay groups marching in the famous Manhattan St. Patrick's Day Parade. In that
Manhattan St. Patrick's Day Parade any Irish group who wants can march, Irish policemen
can march, Irish firemen, Irish footballers, Irish community groups, Irish volleyball
teams, Irish book clubs.

Any Irish people who want to have a good shot at being allowed to march in that parade —
except for Irish gays, because, as far as the organizers of that parade are concerned,
gays are nothing more than walking sex acts, and there is no place for buggery in their
parade. Now, I actually saw a small documentary once about one of the leaders of the
organizers of that parade, they are the Ancient Order of Hibernians, and they're like a
Catholic Orange Order 

— they dress the same and everything — 

and in the documentary, you know, he was a nice old fellow, and he had this lovely wife,
and they seemed very happy together. And when I looked at them, I saw this life lived
together, and I imagined if I asked him about their life together, that he would remember
the first time they met, he would remember how nervous he was on their first date
together, and how proud he was when he turned and saw her coming up the aisle in that
dress that she had fretted over for so long. And I imagine that if I asked him, he would
remember that phone call to say that she had gone into labor and the dash across town, and
the other time when she went so far past her due date that she promised she would bounce
up and down on a trampoline until the baby bounced out of her and how they laughed so hard
about that. And I imagine he would remember other occasions like when their youngest broke
his arm and cried all the way to the hospital, and that other time when she was sick and
he could not sleep alone in the empty bed and so in the middle of the night he got up and
went back to the hospital even though he knew they wouldn't let him in to see her at that
hour.

I imagine that he would remember all of those things and many more. All of the small
things that go up to making a relationship and making a person a person. And when I looked
at him, I imagined all of those things too. But when he looks at me he doesn't see me that
way. He doesn't see gay people that way. To him we are just sex acts and there is no place
for sex acts in his parade. I am forty-five years old and I am fed up putting up. So, I'm
not anymore. I'm forty-five years old and I am not putting up anymore because I don't have
the energy anymore. Putting up is exhausting! I am forty-five years old and I'm not
putting up anymore because I don't have the patience anymore. Forty-five years old! I was
born six months before the Stonewall riots, and you have had forty-five years to work out,
that despite appearances, I am just as ordinary, just as unremarkable, and just as human
as you are! I'm forty-five years old and I am not asking anymore I am just being — human
being! Thank you for your time! 

Thank you! Thank you! 

<!--
ad_duration=0
event="TEDxDublin"
external_start_time=0
intro_duration=0
is_subtitle_required="False"
is_talk_featured="False"
language="en"
language_swap="False"
native_language="en"
number_of_related_talks=6
number_of_speakers=1
number_of_subtitled_videos=0
number_of_tags=5
number_of_talk_download_languages=8
number_of_talk_more_resources=0
number_of_talk_recommendations=0
number_of_talks_take_actions=0
post_ad_duration=0
published_timestamp="2020-06-19 01:06:53"
recording_date="2014-09-13"
speaker_description="Activist, drag queen"
speaker_is_published=0
speaker_name="Panti Bliss"
talk_name="The necessity of normalizing queer love"
talks_tags=["lgbt","love","social-change","relationships","global-issues"]
url_photo_talk="https://s3.amazonaws.com/talkstar-photos/uploads/3b259399-1d88-401b-b5c6-6e6be6d37c8c/Panti+Bliss+two.jpeg"
url_webpage="https://www.ted.com/talks/panti_bliss_the_necessity_of_normalizing_queer_love"
video_type_name="TEDx Talk"
-->