---
title: What young women believe about their own sexual pleasure
speaker: Peggy Orenstein
description: >-
 Why do girls feel empowered to engage in sexual activity but not to enjoy it? For
 three years, author Peggy Orenstein interviewed girls ages 15 to 20 about their
 attitudes toward and experiences of sex. She discusses the pleasure that's
 largely missing from their sexual encounters and calls on us to close the "orgasm
 gap" by talking candidly with our girls from an early age about sex, bodies,
 pleasure and intimacy.
date: 2016-10-26
tags: ["children","communication","family","empathy","feminism","gender-equality","inequality","parenting","humanity","relationships","sex","social-change","women","society"]
slug: peggy_orenstein_what_young_women_believe_about_their_own_sexual_pleasure
---

For several years now, we've been engaged in a national debate about sexual assault on
campus. No question — it's crucial that young people understand the ground rules for
consent, but that's where the conversation about sex is ending. And in that vacuum of
information the media and the Internet — that new digital street corner — are educating
our kids for us. If we truly want young people to engage safely, ethically, and yes,
enjoyably, it's time to have open honest discussion about what happens after "yes," and
that includes breaking the biggest taboo of all and talking to young people about women's
capacity for and entitlement to sexual pleasure. Yeah.

Come on, ladies.

I spent three years talking to girls ages 15 to 20 about their attitudes and experience of
sex. And what I found was that while young women may feel entitled to engage in sexual
behavior, they don't necessarily feel entitled to enjoy it. Take this sophomore at the Ivy
League college who told me, "I come from a long line of smart, strong women. My
grandmother was a firecracker, my mom is a professional, my sister and I are loud, and
that's our form of feminine power." She then proceeded to describe her sex life to me: a
series of one-off hookups, starting when she was 13, that were ... not especially
responsible, not especially reciprocal and not especially enjoyable. She shrugged. "I
guess we girls are just socialized to be these docile creatures who don't express our
wants or needs." "Wait a minute," I replied. "Didn't you just tell me what a smart, strong
woman you are?" She hemmed and hawed.

"I guess," she finally said, "no one told me that that smart, strong image applies to
sex."I should probably say right up top that despite the hype, teenagers are not engaging
in intercourse more often or at a younger age than they were 25 years ago. They are,
however, engaging in other behavior. And when we ignore that, when we label that as "not
sex," that opens the door to risky behavior and disrespect. That's particularly true of
oral sex, which teenagers consider to be less intimate than intercourse. Girls would tell
me, "it's no big deal," like they'd all read the same instruction manual — at least if
boys were on the receiving end. Young women have lots of reasons for participating. It
made them feel desired; it was a way to boost social status. Sometimes, it was a way to
get out of an uncomfortable situation. As a freshman at a West Coast college said to me,
"A girl will give a guy a blow job at the end of the night because she doesn't want to
have sex with him, and he expects to be satisfied.

So, if I want him to leave and I don't want anything to happen ... " I heard so many
stories of girls performing one-sided oral sex that I started asking, "What if every time
you were alone with a guy, he told you to get him a glass of water from the kitchen, and
he never got you a glass of water — or if he did, it was like ... 'you want me to uh
...?'" You know, totally begrudging. You wouldn't stand for it. But it wasn't always that
boys didn't want to. It was that girls didn't want them to. Girls expressed a sense of
shame around their genitals. A sense that they were simultaneously icky and sacred.
Women's feelings about their genitals have been directly linked to their enjoyment of sex.
Yet, Debby Herbenick, a researcher at Indiana University, believes that girls' genital
self-image is under siege, with more pressure than ever to see them as unacceptable in
their natural state. According to research, about three-quarters of college women remove
their pubic hair — all of it — at least on occasion, and more than half do so
regularly.

Girls would tell me that hair removal made them feel cleaner, that it was a personal
choice. Though, I kind of wondered if left alone on a desert island, if this was how they
would choose to spend their time.

And when I pushed further, a darker motivation emerged: avoiding humiliation. "Guys act
like they would be disgusted by it," one young woman told me. "No one wants to be talked
about like that." The rising pubic hair removal reminded me of the 1920s, when women first
started regularly shaving their armpits and their legs. That's when flapper dresses came
into style, and women's limbs were suddenly visible, open to public scrutiny. There's a
way that I think that this too is a sign. That a girl's most intimate part is open to
public scrutiny, open to critique, to becoming more about how it looks to someone else
than how it feels to her. The shaving trend has sparked another rise in labiaplasty.
Labiaplasty, which is the trimming of the inner and outer labia, is the fastest-growing
cosmetic surgery among teenage girls. It rose 80 percent between 2014 and 2015, and
whereas girls under 18 comprise two percent of all cosmetic surgeries, they are five
percent of labiaplasty.

The most sought-after look, incidentally, in which the outer labia appear fused like a
clam shell, is called ... wait for it ... "The Barbie."

I trust I don't have to tell you that Barbie is a) made of plastic and b) has no
genitalia.

The labiaplasty trend has become so worrisome that the American College of Obstetricians
and Gynecologists has issued a statement on the procedure, which is rarely medically
indicated, has not been proven safe and whose side effects include scarring, numbness,
pain and diminished sexual sensation. Now, admittedly, and blessedly, the number of girls
involved is still quite small, but you could see them as canaries in a coal mine, telling
us something important about the way girls see their bodies. Sara McClelland, a
psychologist at the University of Michigan, coined what is my favorite phrase ever in
talking about all of this: "Intimate justice." That's the idea that sex has political, as
well as personal implications, just like, who does the dishes in your house, or who
vacuums the rug. And it raises similar issues about inequality, about economic disparity,
violence, physical and mental health. Intimate justice asks us to consider who is entitled
to engage in an experience.

Who is entitled to enjoy it? Who is the primary beneficiary? And how does each partner
define "good enough"? Honestly, I think those questions are tricky and sometimes traumatic
for adult women to confront, but when we're talking about girls, I just kept coming back
to the idea that their early sexual experience shouldn't have to be something that they
get over. In her work, McClelland found that young women were more likely than young men to
use their partner's pleasure as a measure of their satisfaction. So they'd say things
like, "If he's sexually satisfied, then I'm sexually satisfied." Young men were more
likely to measure their satisfaction by their own orgasm. Young women also defined bad sex
differently. In the largest ever survey ever conducted on American sexual behavior, they
reported pain in their sexual encounters 30 percent of the time. They also used words like
"depressing," "humiliating," "degrading." The young men never used that
language.

So when young women report sexual satisfaction levels that are equal to or greater than
young men's — and they do in research — that can be deceptive. If a girl goes into an
encounter hoping that it won't hurt, wanting to feel close to her partner and expecting
him to have an orgasm, she'll be satisfied if those criteria are met. And there's nothing
wrong with wanting to feel close to your partner, or wanting him to be happy, and orgasm
isn't the only measure of an experience ... but absence of pain — that's a very low bar
for your own sexual fulfillment. Listening to all of this and thinking about it, I began to
realize that we performed a kind of psychological clitoridectomy on American girls.
Starting in infancy, parents of baby boys are more likely to name all their body parts, at
least they'll say, "here's your pee-pee." Parents of baby girls go right from navel to
knees, and they leave this whole situation in here unnamed.

There's no better way to make something unspeakable than not to name it. Then kids go into
their puberty education classes and they learn that boys have erections and ejaculations,
and girls have ... periods and unwanted pregnancy. And they see that internal diagram of a
woman's reproductive system — you know, the one that looks kind of like a steer head
—

And it always grays out between the legs. So we never say vulva, we certainly never say
clitoris. No surprise, fewer than half of teenage girls age 14 to 17 have ever
masturbated. And then they go into their partnered experience and we expect that somehow
they'll think sex is about them, that they'll be able to articulate their needs, their
desires, their limits. It's unrealistic. Here's something, though. Girls' investment in
their partner's pleasure remains regardless of the gender of the partner. So in same-sex
encounters, the orgasm gap disappears. And young women climax at the same rate as men.
Lesbian and bisexual girls would tell me that they felt liberated to get off the script —
free to create an encounter that worked for them. Gay girls also challenged the idea of
first intercourse as the definition of virginity. Not because intercourse isn't a big
deal, but it's worth questioning why we consider this one act, which most girls associate
with discomfort or pain, to be the line in the sand of sexual adulthood — so much more
meaningful, so much more transformative than anything else.

And it's worth considering how this is serving girls; whether it's keeping them safer from
disease, coercion, betrayal, assault. Whether it's encouraging mutuality and caring; what
it means about the way they see other sex acts; whether it's giving them more control over
and joy in their experience, and what it means about gay teens, who can have multiple sex
partners without heterosexual intercourse. So I asked a gay girl that I met, "How'd you
know you weren't a virgin anymore?" She said she had to Google it.

And Google wasn't sure.

She finally decided that she wasn't a virgin anymore after she'd had her first orgasm with
a partner. And I thought — whoa. What if just for a second we imagined that was the
definition? Again, not because intercourse isn't a big deal — of course it is — but it
isn't the only big deal, and rather than thinking about sex as a race to a goal, this
helps us reconceptualize it as a pool of experiences that include warmth, affection,
arousal, desire, touch, intimacy. And it's worth asking young people: who's really the
more sexually experienced person? The one who makes out with a partner for three hours and
experiments with sensual tension and communication, or the one who gets wasted at a party
and hooks up with a random in order to dump their "virginity" before they get to
college? The only way that shift in thinking can happen though is if we talk to young
people more about sex — if we normalize those discussions, integrating them into everyday
life, talking about those intimate acts in a different way — the way we mostly have
changed in the way that we talk about women in the public realm. Consider a survey of 300
randomly chosen girls from a Dutch and an American university, two similar universities,
talking about their early experience of sex.

The Dutch girls embodied everything we say we want from our girls. They had fewer negative
consequences, like disease, pregnancy, regret — more positive outcomes like being able to
communicate with their partner, who they said they knew very well; preparing for the
experience responsibly; enjoying themselves. What was their secret? The Dutch girls said
that their doctors, teachers and parents talked to them candidly, from an early age, about
sex, pleasure and the importance of mutual trust. What's more, while American parents
weren't necessarily less comfortable talking about sex, we tend to frame those
conversations entirely in terms or risk and danger, whereas Dutch parents talk about
balancing responsibility and joy. I have to tell you, as a parent myself, that hit me
hard, because I know, had I not delved into that research, I would have talked to my own
child about contraception, about disease protection, about consent because I'm a modern
parent, and I would have thought ...

job well done. Now I know that's not enough. I also know what I hope for for our girls. I
want them to see sexuality as a source of self-knowledge, creativity and communication,
despite its potential risks. I want them to be able to revel in their bodies' sensuality
without being reduced to it. I want them to be able to ask for what they want in bed, and
to get it. I want them to be safe from unwanted pregnancy, disease, cruelty,
dehumanization, violence. If they are assaulted, I want them to have recourse from their
schools, their employers, the courts. It's a lot to ask, but it's not too much. As parents,
teachers, advocates and activists, we have raised a generation of girls to have a voice,
to expect egalitarian treatment in the home, in the classroom, in the workplace. Now it's
time to demand that intimate justice in their personal lives as well. Thank
you.

<!--
ad_duration=3.33
event="TEDWomen 2016"
external_start_time=0
has_talk_citation=0
intro_duration=11.82
is_subtitle_required="False"
is_talk_featured="True"
language="en"
language_swap="False"
native_language="en"
number_of_related_talks=6
number_of_speakers=1
number_of_subtitled_videos=26
number_of_tags=14
number_of_talk_download_languages=26
number_of_talk_more_resources=1
number_of_talk_recommendations=5
number_of_talks_take_actions=0
post_ad_duration=0.83
published_timestamp="2017-03-15 15:00:13"
recording_date="2016-10-26"
speaker_description="Journalist, author"
speaker_is_published=1
speaker_name="Peggy Orenstein"
talk_name="What young women believe about their own sexual pleasure"
talk_recommendations_blurb="Check out these extra resources on sex education, curated by Peggy Orenstein."
talks_tags=["children","communication","family","empathy","feminism","gender-equality","inequality","parenting","humanity","relationships","sex","social-change","women","society"]
talks_take_action=[]
url_audio="https://download.ted.com/talks/PeggyOrenstein_2016W.mp3?apikey=acme-roadrunner"
url_photo_speaker="https://pe.tedcdn.com/images/ted/8e7751f327e4b1059f21320a01c58834463380b1_254x191.jpg"
url_photo_talk="https://s3.amazonaws.com/talkstar-photos/uploads/764951a6-0c5f-44ca-8549-013f14deefde/PeggyOrenstein_2016W-embed.jpg"
url_webpage="https://www.ted.com/talks/peggy_orenstein_what_young_women_believe_about_their_own_sexual_pleasure"
video_type_name="TED Stage Talk"
-->