---
title: How to recognize your white privilege — and use it to fight inequality
speaker: Peggy McIntosh
description: >-
 Many of us believe that we're living in a meritocracy, deserving of what we have
 and compassionate toward those with less. But that's not true: white people have
 been given a headstart and ongoing advantages due to the color of their skin,
 while people of color suffer from equally arbitrary disadvantages, says scholar
 and activist Peggy McIntosh. She explains what led her to recognize her privilege
 — and how it can be used by those with power to ensure a fairer life for
 others.
date: 2012-10-06
tags: ["race","inequality","education","social-change","activism"]
slug: peggy_mcintosh_how_to_recognize_your_white_privilege_and_use_it_to_fight_inequality
---

I imagine a hypothetical line of social justice. A hypothetical line — an imaginary line
of social justice that is parallel to the floor, also parallel to the Earth. And on this
imaginary line of social justice, things feel fair. Below it, one can be pushed down
either as a member of a group or an individual, through bullying, teasing, being
stereotyped, having prejudices against one or one's group, being a survivor of genocide, 
being a scapegoat, being a discarded person. What I study, is what happens above the
hypothetical line of social justice. And in school, I was never taught to even notice this
realm. Above the hypothetical line, one can be pushed up, believed, thought worthy of
responsibility, considered to be responsible with money, considered to be capable of doing
the school work, or any other kind of work. One can be seen as representative of the best.
That's privilege. Above the hypothetical line of justice, one has more than one deserved
because of circumstances of birth and other people's positive projections onto
one.

And below it is disadvantage. That is unearned disadvantage. And I believe everybody in
this room has a combination of both experiences. Having more than we actually earned, and
having less than we've actually earned. And I didn't used to think this way. I was raised,
as many of you have been, on the myth of meritocracy, which is, the unit of society is the
individual. And whatever the individual ends up with at death, is what that individual
worked for and earned and deserved and wanted. Well, it isn't true. These privileged
systems which locate us above and below the hypothetical line of social justice were
invented, and we were born into them. And we all know both sides. And that's a reason for
compassion about the sadness of having been born into systems that gave us such — and here
I quote the poet Adrienne Rich, such different politics of location. I came to notice
privilege because I noticed male privilege. And then I noticed, in parallel fashion, white
privilege.

And both of these things were very distressing. I hated learning about privilege systems.
But I found I had to, to explain my life. Three years in a row, men and women in a seminar
I was leading at Wellesley College, Wellesley Centers for Women, got into a bad relation
with each other in the spring of each year. We had monthly seminars. They were great. The
men and the women were all professors from different colleges in New York, New Jersey,
Connecticut, and New England. And we were talking about quite a difficult subject, but
fascinating. How to bring materials on women into all the liberal arts curriculum, in
every field？ So how to bring women's history into political science, economics, sociology,
psychology, literature, music, art, PT, all of the technical fields as well. And the men
were our allies. They were very brave. They had taken a fair amount of flak on their
campuses for coming to a women's college to talk about women's studies, and bringing it to
the main curriculum, not keeping it isolated.

These were great men. And very nice men. And yet, three years running with different
groups of men, there was a falling out that I realized as I looked through my notes, took
this form as a natural occurrence in the spring. Toward the spring of the year in these
monthly seminars, once we all trusted each other pretty well, the women would just raise
this question. "Can't we do some of this teaching about women in the introductory courses
that the students take first year in college, the freshman courses?" And the men, to a
person, every year, said, "We're sorry. You know, this is a great seminar, we love doing
this work, but you can't put anything on women into the freshman courses." I was a
prodigious note taker, and I found in my notes one man had said, "When you're trying to
lay the foundation blocks for knowledge in those introductory courses, you can't put in
soft stuff." Well, thanks a lot. （Laughter） And I remember my first thought was, he
doesn't understand labor pains.

But also, let me ask you, exactly who here has a truly soft mother? 

And in that comment, he was including women in general. But he was a very nice man. I had
a comment written down from another year when the women also asked, how can we get this
material into the first year courses? And a very, very nice man said, in an explanatory
way, "See, that first year, the students are trying to figure out what will be their
major. That's their discipline. And if you want students to think in a disciplined way,
you can't put in extras." Now every one of these very nice men is born of a woman. And she
has become extra in his head. Together with, lots of them were married to women. His
wife, his daughter, his sisters, and his cousins, and his aunts, they've all become extra.
And I'm wondering, how have they become extra, and this is such a nice man? And then I was
rescued from my dilemma, which was, I had to choose. I had to choose whether these are
nice men, and I knew they were, and brave. Or whether they were oppressive.

And I was experiencing them as oppressive. And in the dilemma of thinking I had to choose,
I was rescued by remembering that, back in 1980, black women in the Boston area had
written a number of essays to the effect that white women are oppressive to work with. Not
just some white women. White women were oppressive to work with. I thought, oh dear. Now,
I remember how I responded to those essays. My first response, the "oh dear" response was
"I don't see how they can say that about us! I think we're nice." 

And my second response, which is mortifying to admit, but this is how racist I was in
1980. I thought, I especially think we're nice if we work with them. You can hear the
white superiority there. And as I recalled my responses to reading those essays — by now
it was six years later — I thought, oh, I hope my attitudes didn't show. I hope I was so
nice I covered them over. But after struggling with that for a couple of years, I said
yes, I was oppressive to work with. And my niceness didn't cover my basic racial
superiority assumption. And then I thought, maybe niceness has nothing to do with it. And
that's what I believe today. Niceness has nothing at all to do with this whole matter of
being oppressive to others. I found that now I went back to the men, these are nice men,
but they were very good students of what they were taught, and what I was taught also.
Which is men have knowledge, men make more knowledge, men publish knowledge, men profess
knowledge as professors.

Men run all the major research universities, and men run all of the university presses.
And they have taken in, as I had, too, the idea that knowledge is male, and men are
knowers. And then I realized why my husband has trouble asking for directions when we're
lost. 

It's the identity he was taught is that he is a knower. And I thought, in parallel
fashion, and this is sickening to realize, it's messing up my world picture that I
deserved everything I've got. Now, I was taught that whites have knowledge. Whites make
more knowledge, whites publish knowledge, and whites profess knowledge as professors. And
whites run the big research universities. And whites run the university presses. And I
drank in the idea that knowledge is white, and white people are knowers. And to this day,
in my major project, the SEED project, whose core staff is nine people of color and five
whites, I will, unless I check myself, second guess, and doubt, and judge everything said
— every sentence, every word, said by my colleagues of color. I will do it because my hard
drive is wired with the white privilege that I am a knower. And among my nine colleagues
of color, the level of knowledge and understanding, and intelligence isn't as high as it
is in me.

But, luckily I have alternative software I can install. And when I install the alternative
software, I realize these people have been my major teachers. And I have so much to learn
from them. They are not defective variants of whites. They are my major teachers. So once
I began to see that, it was churning my stomach to realize that I had white privilege
that I hadn't earned, but it was putting me ahead. Then I realized why, at the Wellesley
Centers for Women, I could get big grants my colleagues of color couldn't. Because I had
the knowledge system on my side as a white person. And I realized also the foundations
which gave us money, or the federal government, it was then — they still are in general —
run by whites. And I was trusted, then, with money — with big pots of money, because I was
white. Not because I had earned that trust. So having seen those things, I asked myself,
what else do I have that I didn't earn because I'm white, when I compare myself with
African-American colleagues here in my building at Wellesley Centers for
Women.

And my conscious mind said, nothing. So I asked again, on a daily basis, what do I get,
beside the money system and the knowledge system helping me out, that my colleagues of
color can't count on? And once again, my mind, with the three degrees, and the good
grades, it said, nothing. But I couldn't believe it. I thought I'd seen something huge and
began to name it white privilege. Unearned advantage that came because of my racial/ethnic
status or projected worth. So I decided I had to pray on it. And I went to sleep one night
 — angrily, really. It wasn't the usual prayer in which you ask for something, I was
demanding. I said, if I have anything I didn't earn by contrast of my black friends,
except the money system and the knowledge system, show me. And in the middle of the night,
along came an example. I switched on the light — it woke me up of course — and I wrote it
down. And over the next three months, 46 elements of unearned advantage came to
me.

And they're in my paper, "White Privilege, Unpacking the Invisible Knapsack," and my
paper, "White Privilege and Male Privilege," a personal account of coming to see
correspondences through work in women's studies. And then I decided, because this work was
spreading in many places, I needed to help with the matter of white guilt. I don't believe
we can be guilty, or ashamed, or blamed for being born into systems both above and below
the hypothetical line of social justice. They're arbitrary. They have to do with 
projections onto us, owing to our neighborhood, or our parents' relation to money, or our
body type, or our hair, or our language of origin. They have to do with our region of the
country — these projections that are put on to us, and the rewards or punishments relate
to our sex, to our gender, to our sexual orientation, to our race, to our ethnicity, to
our parents' reputation, to stereotypes people may have about the kinds of group we were
born into.

I don't think blame, shame, or guilt are relevant to the arbitrariness of our placement in
privilege systems. But I decided, beside the metaphor I originally used of white privilege
as an invisible knapsack I can't see or feel on my back, but it's filled with assets that
I can count on cashing in each day — beside that, and the assets include the equivalent of
freeze-dried food, emergency blanket, flashlight, maps, code books, guide books, letters
of introduction, even, maybe, blank checks. But beside that, I decided to put a second
metaphor. And that's the metaphor of white privilege as a bank account that I was given. I
didn't ask for it, and I can't be blamed for it, but I can decide to put it in the service
of weakening the system of white privilege. That is my energy. That is my financial
commitment. That is my daily life. And it's been transformative to use my bank account of
white privilege to weaken the system of white privilege.

It has absolutely transformed my life to be in work that feels right. And it's not based
on guilt. I don't know exactly the wording for it, but I I found that, when I put my
white privilege in this service of weakening white privilege, the bank account keeps
refilling, because I get the benefit of the doubt. So the cops arresting me for speeding
tend to let me off. I get the benefit of the doubt because I'm a little old lady with
white hair. 

And my papers are in order, and my voice is soft. So I get let off. It's not fair. But I
don't want to say, "Officer, officer, arrest me!" 

Because that'll put our insurance up. 

But every day in every way, bank account of white privilege refills, and I get the benefit
of the doubt. It has been transformative to use the power I did not know, I was never
taught that I had, in the service of kinder, fairer, and more compassionate life for
everyone. Thank you. 

<!--
ad_duration=0
event="TEDxTimberlaneSchools"
external_start_time=0
intro_duration=0
is_subtitle_required="False"
is_talk_featured="False"
language="en"
language_swap="False"
native_language="en"
number_of_related_talks=6
number_of_speakers=1
number_of_subtitled_videos=0
number_of_tags=5
number_of_talk_download_languages=1
number_of_talk_more_resources=0
number_of_talk_recommendations=0
number_of_talks_take_actions=0
post_ad_duration=0
published_timestamp="2020-06-04 19:18:13"
recording_date="2012-10-06"
speaker_description="Anti-racism activist, scholar"
speaker_is_published=0
speaker_name="Peggy McIntosh"
talk_name="How to recognize your white privilege — and use it to fight inequality"
talks_tags=["race","inequality","education","social-change","activism"]
url_photo_talk="https://s3.amazonaws.com/talkstar-photos/uploads/bf09072a-b615-46bc-a776-48fb2f25fd32/peggy.jpeg"
url_webpage="https://www.ted.com/talks/peggy_mcintosh_how_to_recognize_your_white_privilege_and_use_it_to_fight_inequality"
video_type_name="TEDx Talk"
-->