---
title: What ping-pong taught me about life
speaker: Pico Iyer
description: >-
 Growing up in England, Pico Iyer was taught that the point of a game was to win.
 Now, some 50 years later, he's realized that competition can be "more like an act
 of love." In this charming, subtly profound talk, he explores what regular games
 of ping-pong in his neighborhood in Japan have revealed about the riddle of
 winning -- and shows why not knowing who's won can feel like the ultimate
 victory.
date: 2019-07-20
tags: ["humanity","life","personal-growth","history","sports","culture"]
slug: pico_iyer_what_ping_pong_taught_me_about_life
---

Every other night in Japan, I step out of my apartment, I climb up a hill for 15 minutes,
and then I head into my local health club, where three ping-pong tables are set up in a
studio. And space is limited, so at every table, one pair of players practices forehands,
another practices backhands, and every now and then, the balls collide in midair and
everybody says, "Wow!" Then, choosing lots, we select partners and play doubles. But I
honestly couldn't tell you who's won, because we change partners every five minutes. And
everybody is trying really hard to win points, but nobody is keeping track of who is
winning games. And after an hour or so of furious exertion, I can honestly tell you that
not knowing who has won feels like the ultimate victory. In Japan, it's been said, they've
created a competitive spirit without competition. Now, all of you know that geopolitics is
best followed by watching ping-pong.

The two strongest powers in the world were fiercest enemies until, in 1972, an American
ping-pong team was allowed to visit Communist China. And as soon as the former adversaries
were gathered around some small green tables, each of them could claim a victory, and the
whole world could breathe more easily. China's leader, Mao Zedong, wrote a whole manual on
ping-pong, and he called the sport "a spiritual nuclear weapon." And it's been said that
the only honorary lifelong member of the US Table Tennis Association is the then-President
Richard Nixon, who helped to engineer this win-win situation through ping-pong diplomacy.
But long before that, really, the history of the modern world was best told through the
bouncing white ball."Ping-pong" sounds like a cousin of "sing-song," like something
Eastern, but actually, it's believed that it was invented by high-class Brits during
Victorian times, who started hitting wine corks over walls of books after
dinner.

No exaggeration.

And by the end of World War I, the sport was dominated by players from the former
Austro-Hungarian Empire: eight out of nine early world championships were claimed by
Hungary. And Eastern Europeans grew so adept at hitting back everything that was hit at
them that they almost brought the whole sport to a standstill. In one championship match
in Prague in 1936, the first point is said to have lasted two hours and 12 minutes. The
first point! Longer than a "Mad Max" movie. And according to one of the players, the
umpire had to retire with a sore neck before the point was concluded.

That player started hitting the ball back with his left hand and dictating chess moves
between shots.

Many in the audience started, of course, filing out, as that single point lasted maybe
12,000 strokes. And an emergency meeting of the International Table Tennis Association had
to be held then and there, and soon the rules were changed so that no game could last
longer than 20 minutes.

Sixteen years later, Japan entered the picture, when a little-known watchmaker called
Hiroji Satoh showed up at the world championships in Bombay in 1952. And Satoh was not
very big, he wasn't highly rated, he was wearing spectacles, but he was armed with a
paddle that was not pimpled, as other paddles were, but covered by a thick spongy rubber
foam. And thanks to this silencing secret weapon, the little-known Satoh won a gold medal.
One million people came out into the streets of Tokyo to greet him upon his return, and
really, Japan's postwar resurgence was set into motion. What I learned, though, at my
regular games in Japan, is more what could be called the inner sport of global domination,
sometimes known as life. We never play singles in our club, only doubles, and because, as
I say, we change partners every five minutes, if you do happen to lose, you're very likely
to win six minutes later. We also play best-of-two sets, so often, there's no loser at
all.

Ping-pong diplomacy. And I always remember that as a boy growing up in England, I was
taught that the point of a game was to win. But in Japan, I'm encouraged to believe that,
really, the point of a game is to make as many people as possible around you feel that
they are winners. So you're not careening up and down as an individual might, but you're
part of a regular, steady chorus. The most skillful players in our club deploy their
skills to turn a 9-1 lead for their team into a 9-9 game in which everybody is intensely
involved. And my friend who hits these high, looping lobs that smaller players flail at
and miss — well, he wins a lot of points, but I think he's thought of as a loser. In
Japan, a game of ping-pong is really like an act of love. You're learning how to play with
somebody, rather than against her. And I'll confess, at first, this seemed to me to take
all the fun out of the sport.

I couldn't exult after a tremendous upset victory against our strongest players, because
six minutes later, with a new partner, I was falling behind again. On the other hand, I
never felt disconsolate. And when I flew away from Japan and started playing singles again
with my English archrival, I noticed that after every defeat, I was really brokenhearted.
But after every victory, I couldn't sleep either, because I knew there was only one way to
go, and that was down. Now, if I were trying to do business in Japan, this would lead to
endless frustration. In Japan, unlike elsewhere, if the score is still level after four
hours, a baseball game ends in a tie, and because the league standings are based on
winning percentage, a team with quite a few ties can finish ahead of a team with more
victories. One of the first times an American was ever brought over to Japan to lead a
professional Japanese baseball team, Bobby Valentine, in 1995, he took this really
mediocre squad, he lead them to a stunning second-place finish, and he was instantly
fired.

Why? "Well," said the team spokesman, "because of his emphasis on winning."

Official Japan can feel quite a lot like that point that was said to last two hours and 12
minutes, and playing not to lose can take all the imagination, the daring, the excitement,
out of things. At the same time, playing ping-pong in Japan reminds me why choirs regularly
enjoy more fun than soloists. In a choir, your only job is to play your small part
perfectly, to hit your notes with feeling, and by so doing, to help to create a beautiful
harmony that's much greater than the sum of its parts. Yes, every choir does need a
conductor, but I think a choir releases you from a child's simple sense of either-ors. You
come to see that the opposite of winning isn't losing — it's failing to see the larger
picture. As my life goes on, I'm really startled to see that no event can properly be
assessed for years after it has unfolded. I once lost everything I owned in the world,
every last thing, in a wildfire.

But in time, I came to see that it was that seeming loss that allowed me to live on the
earth more gently, to write without notes, and actually, to move to Japan and the inner
health club known as the ping-pong table. Conversely, I once stumbled into the perfect
job, and I came to see that seeming happiness can stand in the way of true joy even more
than misery does. Playing doubles in Japan really relieves me of all my anxiety, and at the
end of an evening, I notice everybody is filing out in a more or less equal state of
delight. I'm reminded every night that not getting ahead isn't the same thing as falling
behind any more than not being lively is the same thing as being dead. And I've come to
understand why it is that Chinese universities are said to offer degrees in ping-pong, and
why researchers have found that ping-pong can actually help a little with mild mental
disorders and even autism.

But as I watch the 2020 Olympics in Tokyo, I'm going to be keenly aware that it won't be
possible to tell who's won or who's lost for a very long time. You remember that point I
mentioned that was said to last for two hours and 12 minutes? Well, one of the players
from that game ended up, six years later, in the concentration camps of Auschwitz and
Dachau. But he walked out alive. Why? Simply because a guard in the gas chamber recognized
him from his ping-pong playing days. Had he been the winner of that epic match? It hardly
mattered. As you recall, many people had filed out before even the first point was
concluded. The only thing that saved him was the fact that he took part. The best way to
win any game, Japan tells me every other night, is never, never to think about the
score. Thank you.

<!--
ad_duration=3.33
comment_count=6
event="TEDSummit 2019"
external_start_time=0
has_talk_citation=1
intro_duration=11.82
is_subtitle_required="False"
is_talk_featured="True"
language="en"
language_swap="False"
native_language="en"
number_of_related_talks=6
number_of_speakers=1
number_of_subtitled_videos=17
number_of_tags=6
number_of_talk_download_languages=17
number_of_talk_more_resources=3
number_of_talk_recommendations=2
number_of_talks_take_actions=0
post_ad_duration=0.83
published_timestamp="2019-08-23 14:41:07"
recording_date="2019-07-20"
speaker_description="Author"
speaker_is_published=1
speaker_name="Pico Iyer"
talk_name="What ping-pong taught me about life"
talk_recommendations_blurb="More resources curated by Pico Iyer"
talks_tags=["humanity","life","personal-growth","history","sports","culture"]
talks_take_action=[]
url_audio="https://download.ted.com/talks/PicoIyer_2019T.mp3?apikey=acme-roadrunner"
url_photo_speaker="https://pe.tedcdn.com/images/ted/f3ca31b50f90540f72dcc4b5175b7588029b282e_254x191.jpg"
url_photo_talk="https://s3.amazonaws.com/talkstar-photos/uploads/32a97628-d3b8-439c-b46f-8fa6287e6ef7/PicoIyer_2019T-embed.jpg"
url_webpage="https://www.ted.com/talks/pico_iyer_what_ping_pong_taught_me_about_life"
video_type_name="TED Stage Talk"
-->