---
title: Community-powered criminal justice reform
speaker: Raj Jayadev
description: >-
 Community organizer Raj Jayadev wants to transform the US court system through
 "participatory defense" -- a growing movement that empowers families and
 community members to impact their loved ones' court cases. He shares the
 remarkable results of their work -- including more than 4,000 years of "time
 saved" from incarceration -- and shows how this new model could shift the
 landscape of power in the courts.
date: 2018-03-25
tags: ["criminal-justice","community","activism","social-change","law","crime","tedx","justice-system"]
slug: raj_jayadev_community_powered_criminal_justice_reform
---

This is my favorite protest shirt. It says, "Protect your people." We made it in the
basement of our community center. I've worn it at rallies, at protests and marches, at
candlelight vigils with families who have lost loved ones to police violence. I've seen
how this ethic of community organizing has been able to change arresting practices, hold
individual officers accountable and allow families to feel strong and supported in the
darkest moments of their lives. But when a family would come to our center and say, "My
loved one got arrested, what can we do?" we didn't know how to translate the power of
community organizing that we saw on the streets into the courts. We figured we're not
lawyers, and so that's not our arena to make change. And so despite our belief in
collective action, we would allow people that we cared about to go to court alone. Nine
out of ten times — and this is true nationally — they couldn't afford their own attorney,
and so they'd have a public defender, who is doing heroic work, but was often
under-resourced and stretched bare with too many cases.

They would face prosecutors aiming for high conviction rates, mandatory minimum sentences
and racial bias baked into every stage of the process. And so, facing those odds, stripped
away from the power of community, unsure how to navigate the courts, over 90 percent of
people that face a criminal charge in this country will take a plea deal. Meaning, they'll
never have their fabled day in court that we talk about in television shows and in movies.
And this is the untold part of the story of mass incarceration in America — how we became
the largest jailer in the world. Over two million people currently incarcerated in this
country. And projections that say one out of three black men will see the inside of a
prison cell at some point in their life on this trajectory. But we have a solution. We
decided to be irreverent to this idea that only lawyers can impact the courts. And to
penetrate the judicial system with the power, intellect and ingenuity of community
organizing.

We call the approach "participatory defense." It's a methodology for families and
communities whose loved ones are facing charges, and how they could impact the outcome of
those cases and transform the landscape of power in the courts. How it works is, families
whose loved ones are facing criminal charges will come to a weekly meeting, and it's half
support group, half strategic planning session. And they'll build a community out of what
otherwise would be an isolating and lonely experience. And they'll sit in a circle, and
write the names of their loved ones on a board, who they're there to support. And
collectively, the group will find out ways to tangibly and tactfully impact the outcome of
that case. They'll review police reports to find out inconsistencies; they'll find areas
that require more investigation by the defense attorney; and they'll go to court with each
other, for the emotional support but also so that the judge knows that the person standing
before them is part of a larger community that is invested in their well-being and
success. And the results have been remarkable.

We've seen charges get dismissed, sentences significantly reduced, acquittals won at trial
and, sometimes, it has been literally lifesaving. Like in the case of Ramon Vasquez.
Father of two, family man, truck driver and someone who was wrongfully charged with a
gang-related murder he was totally innocent of, but was facing a life sentence. Ramon's
family came to those meetings shortly after his arrest and his detention, and they worked
the model. And through their hard work, they found major contradictions in the case,
gaping holes in the investigation. And were able to disprove dangerous assumptions by the
detectives. Like that the red hat that they found when they raided his home somehow
affiliated him to a gang lifestyle. Through their photos and their records, they were able
to prove that the red hat was from his son's Little League team that Ramon coached on the
weekends. And they produced independent information that proved that Ramon was on the
other side of town at the time of the alleged incident, through their phone records and
receipts from the stores that they attended. After seven long months of hard work from the
family, Ramon staying strong inside jail, they were able to get the charge
dismissed.

And they brought Ramon home to live the life that he should have been living all along. And
with each new case, the families identified new ways to flex the knowledge of the
community to have impact on the court system. We would go to a lot of sentencing hearings.
And when we would leave the sentencing hearing, on the walk back to the parking lot after
someone's loved one just got sent to prison, the most common refrain we would hear wasn't
so much, "I hate that judge," or "I wish we had a new lawyer." What they would say was, "I
wish they knew him like we know him."And so we developed tools and vehicles for families
to tell the fuller story of their loved one so they would be understood as more than just
a case file. They started making what we call social biography packets, which is families
making a compilation of photos and certificates and letters that show past challenges and
hardships and accomplishments, and future prospects and opportunities.

And the social biography [packets] were working so well in the courts, that we evolved it
into social biography videos. Ten-minute mini documentaries, which were interviews of
people in their homes, and at their churches and at their workplace, explaining who the
person was in the backdrop of their lives. And it was a way for us to dissolve the walls
of the court temporarily. And through the power of video, bring the judge out of the court
and into the community, so that they would be able to understand the fuller context of
someone's life that they're deciding the fate of. One of the first social biography
projects that came out of our camp was by Carnell. He had come to the meetings because he
had pled to a low-level drug charge. And after years of sobriety, got arrested for this
one drug possession charge. But he was facing a five-year prison sentence because of the
sentencing schemes in California. We knew him primarily as a dad.

He'd bring his daughters to the meetings and then play with them at the park across the
street. And he said, "Look, I could do the time, but if I go in, they're going to take my
girls."And so we gave him a camera and said, "Just take pictures of what's like being a
father." And so he took pictures of making breakfast for his daughters and taking them to
school, taking them to after-school programs and doing homework. And it became this photo
essay that he turned in to his lawyer who used it at the sentencing hearing. And that
judge, who originally indicated a five-year prison sentence, understood Carnell in a whole
new way. And he converted that five-year prison sentence into a six-month outpatient
program, so that Carnell could be with his daughters. His girls would have a father in
their life. And Carnell could get the treatment that he was actually seeking. We have one
ceremony of sorts that we use in participatory defense.

And I told you earlier that when families come to the meetings, they write the names of
their loved ones on the board. Those are names that we all get to know, week in, week out,
through the stories of the family, and we're rooting for and praying for and hoping for.
And when we win a case, when we get a sentence reduced, or a charge dropped, or we win an
acquittal, that person, who's been a name on the board, comes to the meeting. And when
their name comes up, they're given an eraser, and they walk over to the board and they
erase their name. And it sounds simple, but it is a spiritual experience. And people are
applauding, and they're crying. And for the families that are just starting that journey
and are sitting in the back of the room, for them to know that there's a finish line, that
one day, they too might be able to bring their loved one home, that they could erase the
name, is profoundly inspiring. We're training organizations all over the country now in
participatory defense.

And we have a national network of over 20 cities. And it's a church in Pennsylvania, it's
a parents' association in Tennessee, it's a youth center in Los Angeles. And the latest
city that we just added to the national network to grow and deepen this practice is
Philadelphia. They literally just started their first weekly participatory defense meeting
last week. And the person that we brought from California to Philadelphia to share their
testimony, to inspire them to know what's possible, was Ramon Vasquez, who went from
sitting in a jail in Santa Clara County, California, to inspiring a community about what's
possible through the perseverance of community across the country. And with all the hubs,
we still use one metric that we invented. It's called time saved. It's a saying that we
actually still say at weekly meetings. And what we say when a family comes in a meeting
for the first time is: if you do nothing, the system is designed to give your loved one
time served.

That's the language the system uses to quantify time of incarceration. But if you engage,
if you participate, you can turn time served into time saved. That's them home with you,
living the life they should be living. So, Carnell, for example, would represent five
years of time saved. So when we totaled our time saved numbers from all the different
participatory defense hubs, through the work in the meetings and at court and making
social biography videos and packets, we had 4,218 years of time saved from incarceration.
That is parents' and children's lives. Young people going to college instead of prison.
We're ending generational cycles of suffering. And when you consider in my home state of
California, it costs 60,000 dollars to house someone in the California prison system, that
means that these families are saving their states a ton of money. I'm not a mathematician,
I haven't done the numbers, but that is money and resources that could be reallocated to
mental health services, to drug treatment programs, to education. And we're now wearing
this shirt in courts all across the country.

And people are wearing this shirt because they want the immediacy of protecting their
people in the courtroom. But what we're telling them is, as practitioners, they're
building a new field, a new movement that is going to forever change the way justice is
understood in this country. Thank you.

<!--
ad_duration=3.33
comment_count=9
event="TEDxBinghamtonUniversity"
external_start_time=0
has_talk_citation=1
intro_duration=11.82
is_subtitle_required="False"
is_talk_featured="True"
language="en"
language_swap="False"
native_language="en"
number_of_related_talks=6
number_of_speakers=1
number_of_subtitled_videos=10
number_of_tags=8
number_of_talk_download_languages=10
number_of_talk_more_resources=0
number_of_talk_recommendations=1
number_of_talks_take_actions=1
post_ad_duration=0.83
published_timestamp="2019-09-12 19:57:22"
recording_date="2018-03-25"
speaker_description="Community organizer"
speaker_is_published=1
speaker_name="Raj Jayadev"
talk_more_resources=[]
talk_name="Community-powered criminal justice reform"
talk_recommendations_blurb="More resources curated by Raj Jayadev"
talks_tags=["criminal-justice","community","activism","social-change","law","crime","tedx","justice-system"]
url_audio="https://download.ted.com/talks/RajJayadev_2018X.mp3?apikey=acme-roadrunner"
url_photo_speaker="https://pe.tedcdn.com/images/ted/71d7065b1ae0d00651d9fe51631dad9f93d67ee6_254x191.jpg"
url_photo_talk="https://s3.amazonaws.com/talkstar-photos/uploads/56445bb1-d3df-4307-bfa2-38d59ffaecb5/RajJayadev_2018X-embed.jpg"
url_webpage="https://www.ted.com/talks/raj_jayadev_community_powered_criminal_justice_reform"
video_type_name="TEDx Talk"
-->