---
title: The Museum of Four in the Morning
speaker: Rives
description: >-
 Beware: Rives has a contagious obsession with 4 a.m. At TED2007, the poet shared
 what was then a minor fixation with a time that kept popping up everywhere. After
 the talk, emails starting pouring in with an avalanche of hilarious references—from
 the cover of "Crochet Today!" magazine to the opening scene of "The Metamorphosis."
 A lyrical peek into his Museum of Four in the Morning, which overflows with
 treasures.
date: 2014-03-25
tags: ["entertainment","humor","online-video","spoken-word","storytelling"]
slug: rives_the_museum_of_four_in_the_morning
---

The most romantic thing to ever happen to me online started out the way most things do:
without me, and not online. On December 10, 1896, the man on the medal, Alfred Nobel,
died. One hundred years later, exactly, actually, December 10, 1996, this charming lady,
Wislawa Szymborska, won the Nobel Prize for literature. She's a Polish poet. She's a big
deal, obviously, but back in '96, I thought I had never heard of her, and when I checked
out her work, I found this sweet little poem, "Four in the Morning.""The hour from night
to day. The hour from side to side. The hour for those past thirty..."And it goes on, but
as soon as I read this poem, I fell for it hard, so hard, I suspected we must have met
somewhere before. Had I shared an elevator ride with this poem? Did I flirt with this poem
in a coffee shop somewhere? I could not place it, and it bugged me, and then in the coming
week or two, I would just be watching an old movie, and this would happen.

Groucho Marx: Charlie, you should have come to the first party. We didn't get home till
around four in the morning. Rives: My roommates would have the TV on, and this would
happen.(Music: Seinfeld theme)

George Costanza: Oh boy, I was up til four in the morning watching that Omen
trilogy. Rives: I would be listening to music, and this would happen.

Elton John: ♪ It's four o'clock in the morning, damn it. ♪Rives: So you can see what was
going on, right? Obviously, the demigods of coincidence were just messing with me. Some
people get a number stuck in their head, you may recognize a certain name or a tune, some
people get nothing, but four in the morning was in me now, but mildly, like a groin
injury. I always assumed it would just go away on its own eventually, and I never talked
about it with anybody, but it did not, and I totally did. In 2007, I was invited to speak
at TED for the second time, and since I was still an authority on nothing, I thought, what
if I made a multimedia presentation on a topic so niche it is actually inconsequential or
actually cockamamie. So my talk had some of my four in the morning examples, but it also
had examples from my fellow TED speakers that year. I found four in the morning in a novel
by Isabel Allende. I found a really great one in the autobiography of Bill
Clinton.

I found a couple in the work of Matt Groening, although Matt Groening told me later that
he could not make my talk because it was a morning session and I gather that he is not an
early riser. However, had Matt been there, he would have seen this mock conspiracy theory
that was un-freaking-canny for me to assemble. It was totally contrived just for that
room, just for that moment. That's how we did it in the pre-TED.com days. It was fun. That
was pretty much it. When I got home, though, the emails started coming in from people who
had seen the talk live, beginning with, and this is still my favorite, "Here's another one
for your collection: 'It's the friends you can call up at 4 a.m. that matter.'" The
sentiment is Marlene Dietrich. The email itself was from another very sexy European type,
TED Curator Chris Anderson. 

Chris found this quote on a coffee cup or something, and I'm thinking, this man is the
Typhoid Mary of ideas worth spreading, and I have infected him. I am contagious, which was
confirmed less than a week later when a Hallmark employee scanned and sent an actual
greeting card with that same quotation. As a bonus, she hooked me up with a second one
they make. It says, "Just knowing I can call you at four in the morning if I need to makes
me not really need to," which I love, because together these are like, "Hallmark: When you
care enough to send the very best twice, phrased slightly differently."I was not surprised
at the TEDster and New Yorker magazine overlap. A bunch of people sent me this when it
came out. "It's 4 a.m.—maybe you'd sleep better if you bought some crap."I was surprised
at the TEDster/"Rugrats" overlap. More than one person sent me this.

Didi Pickles: It's four o'clock in the morning. Why on Earth are you making chocolate
pudding? Stu Pickles: Because I've lost control of my life.

Rives: And then there was the lone TEDster who was disgruntled I had overlooked what he
considers to be a classic.

Roy Neary: Get up, get up! I'm not kidding. Ronnie Neary: Is there an accident? Roy: No,
it's not an accident. You wanted to get out of the house anyway, right? Ronnie: Not at four
o'clock in the morning. Rives: So that's "Close Encounters," and the main character is all
worked up because aliens, momentously, have chosen to show themselves to earthlings at
four in the morning, which does make that a very solid example. Those were all really
solid examples. They did not get me any closer to understanding why I thought I recognized
this one particular poem. But they followed the pattern. They played along. Right? Four in
the morning as this scapegoat hour when all these dramatic occurrences allegedly occur.
Maybe this was some kind of cliche that had never been taxonomized before. Maybe I was on
the trail of a new meme or something. Just when things were getting pretty interesting,
things got really interesting.

TED.com launched, later that year, with a bunch of videos from past talks, including mine,
and I started receiving "four in the morning" citations from what seemed like every time
zone on the planet. Much of it was content I never would have found on my own if I was
looking for it, and I was not. I don't know anybody with juvenile diabetes. I probably
would have missed the booklet, "Grilled Cheese at Four O'Clock in the Morning."

I do not subscribe to Crochet Today! magazine, although it looks delightful.

Take note of those clock ends. This is a college student's suggestion for what a "four in
the morning" gang sign should look like. People sent me magazine ads. They took
photographs in grocery stores. I got a ton of graphic novels and comics. A lot of good
quality work, too: "The Sandman," "Watchmen." There's a very cute example here from
"Calvin and Hobbes." In fact, the oldest citation anybody sent in was from a cartoon from
the Stone Age. Take a look.

Wilma Flintstone: Like how early? Fred Flintstone: Like at 4 a.m., that's how early. Rives:
And the flip side of the timeline, this is from the 31st century. A thousand years from
now, people are still doing this.

: Announcer: The time is 4 a.m. 

Rives: It shows the spectrum. I received so many songs, TV shows, movies, like from dismal
to famous, I could give you a four-hour playlist. If I just stick to modern male movie
stars, I keep it to the length of about a commercial. Here's your sampler.(Movie montage
of "It's 4 a.m.")

Rives: So somewhere along the line, I realized I have a hobby I didn't know I wanted, and
it is crowdsourced. But I was also thinking what you might be thinking, which is really,
couldn't you do this with any hour of the day? First of all, you are not getting clips like
that about four in the afternoon. Secondly, I did a little research. You know, I was kind
of interested. If this is confirmation bias, there is so much confirmation, I am biased.
Literature probably shows it best. There are a couple three in the mornings in
Shakespeare. There's a five in the morning. There are seven four in the mornings, and
they're all very dire. In "Measure for Measure," it's the call time for the executioner.
Tolstoy gives Napoleon insomnia at four in the morning right before battle in "War and
Peace." Charlotte Brontë's "Jane Eyre" has got kind of a pivotal four in the morning, as
does Emily Brontë's "Wuthering Heights." "Lolita" has as a creepy four in the
morning.

"Huckleberry Finn" has one in dialect. Someone sent in H.G. Wells' "The Invisible Man."
Someone else sent in Ralph Ellison's "Invisible Man." "The Great Gatsby" spends the last
four in the morning of his life waiting for a lover who never shows, and the most famous
wake-up in literature, perhaps, "The Metamorphosis." First paragraph, the main character
wakes up transformed into a giant cockroach, but we already know, cockroach
notwithstanding, something is up with this guy. Why? His alarm is set for four o'clock in
the morning. What kind of person would do that? This kind of person would do
that.

(4 a.m. alarm clock montage) 

Newcaster: Top of the hour. Time for the morning news. But of course, there is no news
yet. Everyone's still asleep in their comfy, comfy beds. Rives: Exactly. So that's Lucy
from the Peanuts, "Mommie Dearest", Rocky, first day of training, Nelson Mandela, first
day in office, and Bart Simpson, which combined with a cockroach would give you one hell
of a dinner party and gives me yet another category, people waking up, in my big old
database. Just imagine that your friends and your family have heard that you collect, say,
stuffed polar bears, and they send them to you. Even if you don't really, at a certain
point, you totally collect stuffed polar bears, and your collection is probably pretty
kick-ass. And when I got to that point, I embraced it. I got my curator on. I started fact
checking, downloading, illegally screen-grabbing. I started archiving. My hobby had become
a habit, and my habit gave me possibly the world's most eclectic Netflix
queue.

At one point, it went, "Guys and Dolls: The Musical," "Last Tango in Paris," "Diary of a
Wimpy Kid," "Porn Star: Legend of Ron Jeremy." Why "Porn Star: Legend of Ron Jeremy"?
Because someone told me I would find this clip in there.

Ron Jeremy: I was born in Flushing, Queens on March, 12, 1953, at four o'clock in the
morning. Rives: Of course he was. 

Yeah. Not only does it seem to make sense, it also answers the question, "What do Ron
Jeremy and Simone de Beauvoir have in common?" Simone de Beauvoir begins her entire
autobiography with the sentence, "I was born at four o'clock in the morning," which I had
because someone else had emailed it to me, and when they did, I had another bump up in my
entry for this, because porn star Ron Jeremy and feminist Simone de Beauvoir are not just
different people. They are different people that have this thing connecting them, and I
did not know if that is trivia or knowledge or inadvertent expertise, but I did wonder, is
there maybe a cooler way to do this? So last October, in gentleman scholar tradition, I put
the entire collection online as "Museum of Four in the Morning." You can click on that red
"refresh" button. It will take you at random to one of hundreds of snippets that are in
the collection.

Here is a knockout poem by Billy Collins called "Forgetfulness."

Billy Collins: No wonder you rise in the middle of the night to look up the date of a
famous battle in a book on war. No wonder the moon in the window seems to have drifted out
of a love poem that you used to know by heart. Rives: So the first hour of this project was
satisfying. A Bollywood actor sang a line on a DVD in a cafe. Half a globe away, a
teenager made an Instagram video of it and sent it to me, a stranger. Less than a week
later, though, I received a little bit of grace. I received a poignant tweet. It was
brief. It just said, "Reminds me of an ancient mix tape."The name was a pseudonym,
actually, or a pseudo-pseudonym. As soon as I saw the initials, and the profile pic, I
knew immediately, my whole body knew immediately who this was, and I knew immediately what
mix tape she was talking about. 

L.D. was my college romance. This is in the early '90s. I was an undegrad. She was a grad
student in the library sciences department. Not the kind of librarian that takes her
glasses off, lets her hair down, suddenly she's smoking hot. She was already smoking hot,
she was super dorky, and we had a December-May romance, meaning we started dating in
December, and by May, she had graduated and became my one that got away. But her mix tape
did not get away. I have kept this mix tape in a box with notes and postcards, not just
from L.D., from my life, but for decades. It's the kind of box where, if I have a
girlfriend, I tend to hide it from her, and if I had a wife, I'm sure I would share it
with her, but the story — 

— with this mix tape is there are seven songs per side, but no song titles. Instead, L.D.
has used the U.S. Library of Congress classification system, including page numbers, to
leave me clues. When I got this mix tape, I put it in my cassette player, I took it to the
campus library, her library, I found 14 books on the shelves. I remember bringing them all
to my favorite corner table, and I read poems paired to songs like food to wine, paired, I
can tell you, like saddle shoes to a cobalt blue vintage cotton dress. I did this again
last October. I'm sitting there, I got new earbuds, old Walkman, I realize this is just
the kind of extravagance I used to take for granted even when I was extravagant. And then
I thought, "Good for him.""PG" is Slavic literature. "7000" series Polish literature.
Z9A24 is a collection of 70 poems. Page 31 is Wislawa Szymborska's poem paired with Paul
Simon's "Peace Like a River."(Music: Paul Simon, "Peace Like a River")

Paul Simon: ♪ Oh, four in the morning ♪ ♪ I woke up from out of my dream ♪Rives: Thank
you. Appreciate it. 

<!--
ad_duration=3.33
event="TEDActive 2014"
external_start_time=0
has_talk_citation=0
intro_duration=11.82
is_subtitle_required="False"
is_talk_featured="True"
language="en"
language_swap="False"
native_language="en"
number_of_related_talks=6
number_of_speakers=1
number_of_subtitled_videos=22
number_of_tags=5
number_of_talk_download_languages=23
number_of_talk_more_resources=1
number_of_talk_recommendations=0
number_of_talks_take_actions=0
post_ad_duration=0.83
published_timestamp="2014-05-16 14:57:05"
recording_date="2014-03-25"
speaker_description="Performance poet, multimedia artist"
speaker_id=27
speaker_is_published=1
speaker_name="Rives"
talk_name="The Museum of Four in the Morning"
talks_tags=["entertainment","humor","online-video","spoken-word","storytelling"]
talks_take_action=[]
url_audio="https://download.ted.com/talks/Rives_2014A.mp3?apikey=acme-roadrunner"
url_photo_speaker="https://pe.tedcdn.com/images/ted/ae0c178f2ef16b45c2791e5608ef84fd0f3d5850_254x191.jpg"
url_photo_talk="https://s3.amazonaws.com/talkstar-photos/uploads/7a34c9a2-0b3e-474b-9893-40dbb8a2105d/Rives_2014-embed.jpg"
url_webpage="https://www.ted.com/talks/rives_the_museum_of_four_in_the_morning"
video_type_name="TED Stage Talk"
-->