---
title: Music is medicine, music is sanity
speaker: Robert Gupta
description: >-
 Robert Gupta, violinist with the LA Philharmonic, talks about a violin lesson he
 once gave to a brilliant, schizophrenic musician -- and what he learned. Called
 back onstage later, Gupta plays his own transcription of the prelude from Bach's
 Cello Suite No. 1.
date: 2010-02-10
tags: ["ted-fellows","brain","entertainment","live-music","mental-health","music","violin","performance"]
slug: robert_gupta_music_is_medicine_music_is_sanity
---

One day, Los Angeles Times columnist Steve Lopez was walking along the streets of downtown
Los Angeles when he heard beautiful music. And the source was a man, an African-American
man, charming, rugged, homeless, playing a violin that only had two strings. And I'm
telling a story that many of you know, because Steve's columns became the basis for a
book, which was turned into a movie, with Robert Downey Jr. acting as Steve Lopez, and
Jamie Foxx as Nathaniel Anthony Ayers, the Juilliard-trained double bassist whose
promising career was cut short by a tragic affliction with paranoid schizophrenia.
Nathaniel dropped out of Juilliard, he suffered a complete breakdown, and 30 years later
he was living homeless on the streets of Skid Row in downtown Los Angeles. I encourage all
of you to read Steve's book or to watch the movie to understand not only the beautiful
bond that formed between these two men, but how music helped shape that bond, and
ultimately was instrumental — if you'll pardon the pun — in helping Nathaniel get off the
streets. I met Mr.

Ayers in 2008, two years ago, at Walt Disney Concert Hall. He had just heard a performance
of Beethoven's First and Fourth symphonies, and came backstage and introduced himself. He
was speaking in a very jovial and gregarious way about Yo-Yo Ma and Hillary Clinton and
how the Dodgers were never going to make the World Series, all because of the treacherous
first violin passage work in the last movement of Beethoven's Fourth Symphony. And we got
talking about music, and I got an email from Steve a few days later saying that Nathaniel
was interested in a violin lesson with me. Now, I should mention that Nathaniel refuses
treatment because when he was treated it was with shock therapy and Thorazine and
handcuffs, and that scar has stayed with him for his entire life. But as a result now, he
is prone to these schizophrenic episodes, the worst of which can manifest themselves as
him exploding and then disappearing for days, wandering the streets of Skid Row, exposed
to its horrors, with the torment of his own mind unleashed upon him. And Nathaniel was in
such a state of agitation when we started our first lesson at Walt Disney Concert Hall —
he had a kind of manic glint in his eyes, he was lost.

And he was talking about invisible demons and smoke, and how someone was poisoning him in
his sleep. And I was afraid, not for myself, but I was afraid that I was going to lose him,
that he was going to sink into one of his states, and that I would ruin his relationship
with the violin if I started talking about scales and arpeggios and other exciting forms
of didactic violin pedagogy. 

So, I just started playing. And I played the first movement of the Beethoven Violin
Concerto. And as I played, I understood that there was a profound change occurring in
Nathaniel's eyes. It was as if he was in the grip of some invisible pharmaceutical, a
chemical reaction, for which my playing the music was its catalyst. And Nathaniel's manic
rage was transformed into understanding, a quiet curiosity and grace. And in a miracle, he
lifted his own violin and he started playing, by ear, certain snippets of violin concertos
which he then asked me to complete — Mendelssohn, Tchaikovsky, Sibelius. And we started
talking about music, from Bach to Beethoven and Brahms, Bruckner, all the B's, from
Bartók, all the way up to Esa-Pekka Salonen. And I understood that he not only had an
encyclopedic knowledge of music, but he related to this music at a personal level. He
spoke about it with the kind of passion and understanding that I share with my colleagues
in the Los Angeles Philharmonic.

And through playing music and talking about music, this man had transformed from the
paranoid, disturbed man that had just come from walking the streets of downtown Los
Angeles to the charming, erudite, brilliant, Juilliard-trained musician. Music is medicine.
Music changes us. And for Nathaniel, music is sanity. Because music allows him to take his
thoughts and delusions and shape them through his imagination and his creativity, into
reality. And that is an escape from his tormented state. And I understood that this was
the very essence of art. This was the very reason why we made music, that we take
something that exists within all of us at our very fundamental core, our emotions, and
through our artistic lens, through our creativity, we're able to shape those emotions into
reality. And the reality of that expression reaches all of us and moves us, inspires and
unites us. And for Nathaniel, music brought him back into a fold of friends.

The redemptive power of music brought him back into a family of musicians that understood
him, that recognized his talents and respected him. And I will always make music with
Nathaniel, whether we're at Walt Disney Concert Hall or on Skid Row, because he reminds me
why I became a musician. Thank you. 

Bruno Giussani: Thank you. Thanks. Robert Gupta. 

Robert Gupta: I'm going to play something that I shamelessly stole from cellists. So,
please forgive me.

<!--
ad_duration=3.33
event="TED2010"
external_start_time=0
intro_duration=11.82
is_subtitle_required="False"
is_talk_featured="True"
language="en"
language_swap="False"
native_language="en"
number_of_related_talks=6
number_of_speakers=1
number_of_subtitled_videos=33
number_of_tags=8
number_of_talk_download_languages=35
number_of_talk_more_resources=0
number_of_talk_recommendations=0
number_of_talks_take_actions=0
post_ad_duration=0.83
published_timestamp="2019-11-12 22:52:14"
recording_date="2010-02-10"
speaker_description="Violinist"
speaker_is_published=1
speaker_name="Robert Gupta"
talk_name="Music is medicine, music is sanity"
talks_tags=["ted-fellows","brain","entertainment","live-music","mental-health","music","violin","performance"]
url_audio="https://download.ted.com/talks/RobertGupta_2010U.mp3?apikey=acme-roadrunner"
url_photo_speaker="https://pe.tedcdn.com/images/ted/159137_254x191.jpg"
url_photo_talk="https://pe.tedcdn.com/images/ted/c9031a0735bdf47cf6af3667bd9ad3101ee1bd5b_1600x1200.jpg"
url_webpage="https://www.ted.com/talks/robert_gupta_music_is_medicine_music_is_sanity"
video_type_name="TED Stage Talk"
-->