---
title: The US is addicted to incarceration. Here's how to break the cycle
speaker: Robin Steinberg and Manoush Zomorodi
description: >-
 Nearly half a million people in the US are in jail right now without being
 convicted of a crime, simply because they can't come up with the money to pay
 cash bail. To try and fix this system, public defender and activist Robin
 Steinberg asked a straightforward question: What if we paid bail for them? In
 conversation with TED Radio Hour host Manoush Zomorodi, Steinberg shares how her
 nonprofit The Bail Project -- which uses a revolving fund to post bail for those
 who can't afford it -- is scaling up their efforts across the country and rolling
 out a new community-based model to fight mass incarceration. (This ambitious plan
 is part of the Audacious Project, TED's initiative to inspire and fund global
 change.)
date: 2019-12-04
tags: ["justice-system","criminal-justice","inequality","law","community","prison","audacious-project","united-states","social-change","activism","crime"]
slug: robin_steinberg_and_manoush_zomorodi_the_us_is_addicted_to_incarceration_here_s_how_to_break_the_cycle
---

Manoush Zomorodi: So, Robin Steinberg, thank you so much for being my first official guest
as the new host of TED Radio Hour. I'm pretty psyched about that. Robin Steinberg: I'm
delighted.

MZ: So OK, I want to start with the Bail Project, how it came to be, how you came up with
the idea. The story goes that 10 years ago, you and your husband were eating Chinese
takeout food when you came up with the concept. You'd been a public defender for over 30
years, but there was this moment where you decided something had to change. RS: So we had
both spent decades in the trenches of the criminal legal system as public defenders,
fighting for each and every client the best we could, defending people's humanity and
their dignity and fighting for their freedom. And no matter how good we were as lawyers,
and I like to think we were really good, and how forceful we fought on behalf of a client,
sometimes it all came down to a few hundred dollars. And that was whether or not your
client could pay bail and fight her case from freedom or whether she was going to be
locked in jail on Rikers Island and desperate would wind up pleading guilty, whether she
did it or not.

And that just enraged us. And sometimes, you know, the answers are simple and they're
right in front of you. And so we thought, "Well, what if we just paid clients' bail?" And
that's where the idea of creating a revolving bail fund — because bail comes back at the
end of a case, if we could raise money and put it in a fund, and have a revolving fund, we
could just pay bail for our clients. Now I have to say, that was back in 2005. People
weren’t talking about criminal justice reform the way they are now, there wasn't a lot of
conversation about bail reform, and quite honestly, we spent two years knocking on
people's door. Nobody answered. Until one day, one man and his family, Jason Flom and his
family, decided to take a chance on us and gave us a grant in 2007. And we began to test
the revolving bail fund model. And to see what would happen. MZ: Can you clarify, though,
like, why it is so important for someone not to be in jail while they await
trial?

You've explained this in the past and it really blew my mind, because I had no idea what
could happen in those days or weeks before someone actually has to plead their case. RS:
Sure. So, being held in jail even for a few days can change the trajectory of your life.
It is not only the place where you can be victimized, sexually, you can be exposed to
violence, you'll be traumatized in all sorts of ways while you're in the jail, and that's
even the first few days or a week is when most jail deaths actually, whether they're
suicides or homicides, actually happen. But while you're sitting in jail, and understand,
folks sitting in jail pretrial have not been convicted of a crime. They're there because
they don't have enough money to pay bail. And while that's happening, people's lives are
falling apart outside. You're losing your job, you might be losing your home, your
children might be taken from you, your immigration status might be jeopardized, you might
get thrown out of school.

So it's the damage to you that's happening in our local jails, but it's also what's
happening to you and your family and your community that you've been removed from while
you're waiting for your trial, which, by the way, can take days, weeks and no
exaggeration, can take years. MZ: So you explained this sort of crazy limbo that people are
in from the TED stage in 2018, and I want to just play a quick clip from that talk that
you gave, which was incredibly moving. Can we play that?(Audio: Robin Steinberg TED2018)
It's time to do something big. It's time to do something bold. It's time to do something
... maybe audacious?

We want to take our proven revolving bail-fund model that we built in the Bronx and spread
it across America, attacking the front-end of the legal system before incarceration
begins.

MZ: The energy in the room when you gave your talk was palpable, and it ended up getting
you quite a bit of funding from the Audacious Project, which is TED's initiative to get
some of these big ideas support to make them actually happen. Can you explain what has
happened since you gave your talk? RS: Sure. So, the Audacious grant allowed us to take our
proven concept and to scale it. And the idea is that we are scaling this model across the
country. We're currently in 18 different sites. And we are doing two things, right? The
Bail Project is designed both, provide an immediate lifeline for folks that are stuck in
jail cells simply because of poverty, because they can't pay their bail, and that's a
response to the immediate direct emergency and human rights crisis that we have in this
country around pretrial incarceration. But the second thing we're trying to do is we're
testing a model that we call community release with voluntary supports.

And what we're trying to prove is, A: you don't need cash bail, people will come back to
court without cash bail. That myth has already been debunked and we know that. But we're
also trying to model you can actually release people back to their communities with
effective court notifications. Make sure they're connected to services they might need.
And people will come back to court while their cases are open, and until those cases
close. It is in an effort to move policy forward, to ensure the systemic change happens,
but here's our fear: it's a race against time. Because as this conversation picks up
speed, and as bail reform begins to take hold, some systems will move to new systems that
we fear will recreate some of the same harms, right, that the initial bail system
[created]. Those are racial disparities, economic inequality, and we can actually recreate
that if we don't get this right.

And so we're in a race against time to prove that you can do a community-based model that
doesn't require electronic monitoring or risk algorithms or jail cells or cash bail, but
that you can simply release people to communities with supports. And that will work. MZ: I
want to come back to that in a minute, but before we do that, my background is as a tech
journalist, and when you talk about scaling a program like this, I can only assume that
you are facing completely different challenges than, say, a founder of an app or a
platform or something like that. What are the challenges? I mean, you're going to states
with different laws, each city must be so completely different. How do you do it? RS: So
you know, scaling the revolving bail fund itself, that's been the easy, elegant solution,
right? That's the easy part, that's direct service part, we can scale that across the
country. The ground game, the teams that work as bail disruptors for the Bail Project at
different locations across the country, they have to take our model and adapt it to the
unique needs of each jurisdiction.

And that's where it becomes complex, and it's very resource intensive, because criminal
justice is incredibly local, and so how each system operates is unique. And what the needs
of our clients are are incredibly different from jurisdiction to jurisdiction. So you can
be in Oklahoma and what you know is that communities have been ravaged by the opioid
crisis, and when we're bringing people home, we have to connect them to services that
might address that. When you're in Spokane, you're talking about an epidemic of
homelessness. So when you're thinking about providing direct services and bringing people
home, you have to be mindful of the fact that in that jurisdiction that may be the biggest
obstacle for people, is that they don't have shelter. And so we need to adapt our model in
every jurisdiction we go to to address the needs of that community. MZ: I could only assume
that some of these communities are not so happy that you're there. That must be a reality
of it.

Do you have to win hearts and minds as well, in some of these places? RS: So I think it
depends on the definition of community. So communities that have been targeted by our
criminal legal system for generations, communities of color, low-income communities,
marginalized communities, women across the country, they are more than happy to see us
come, because we are just an immediate lifeline. Bail funds are a tool to get people out
as an immediate lifeline, it's not a long-term, systemic answer, right? But people are, of
course, they want to get out, go back to their families, their communities want them home.
Has there been some opposition? Sure, of course. You know, when we go into a new site, we
do so carefully, we prospect it carefully, we try to understand who are our partners on
the ground that might help us in this initiative, grassroots organizers, not-for-profit
organizations, systems holders, sheriffs, right?

Who is going to support us and who our opposition might be. MZ: You also put some of the
people that you bail out, you bring them back, right, as program officers. Is that part of
the system that you're trying to make a community around your efforts in some way? RS: So
when we're hiring for local jurisdictions, we always hire locally. If we open a site in
Baton Rouge, we hire people from Baton Rouge and are connected to the community. We try to
prioritize people with lived experience in the criminal legal system, or people who have
been personally impacted by the system. We think it's important, they understand the
system best, they have the best solutions because they're closest to the problem and
they're credible messengers for the clients that we're going to be interviewing and
providing bail for. MZ: So you touched on this, criminal justice reform has become a hot
topic, you must be like, "Yay, finally people are talking about this thing that I've been
banging on about for decades." Here in California actually, though, there has been a big
change.

Now it's complicated, but my understanding is that they're getting rid of cash bail. Good
thing, bad thing, not quite that simple to explain? RS: So everything about criminal
justice reform, and particularly bail reform, is way more complex than it looks, right? So
it's easy to have a hashtag that says "end cash bail." Totally right. We have to eliminate
unaffordable cash bail forever. We know money isn't what makes people come back, it's a
myth, let's get rid of it. But the question about what comes next is very, very complex,
and California was a good example. There was a bill that worked its way through the
political process, called SB 10. It started out as what looked like a bill that would
actually move towards more decarceration. By the time it came out of the political
process, frankly it was a bill that almost nobody in the community would support,
including the Bail Project. And it had gone through some changes in that process that
placed, you know, pretrial services in the hands of law enforcement, that put people
through risk algorithms, that sort of had a lot of the telltale signs of a system that was
going to recreate the same racial inequity and economic inequalities that we had always
seen, and so, that bill actually moved through the process, and we thought that was the
end.

But then the bail bond industry actually got 400,000 signatures to put it on the ballot.
So in November, Californians will be voting on whether or not SB 10 should go forward or
not. MZ: So Californians in the audience, you will be voting on this. How should they
vote? RS: So I'm not so bold as to say that. I may be audacious, but I'm not that
audacious. But what I will say is, educate yourselves. Understand what you're voting on.
Understand what it means to hold somebody in jail who hasn't been convicted of a crime
simply for their poverty, right? And ask yourselves, do we want to have a criminal legal
system that incarcerates people before they've been convicted of a crime? Do we want to
have a criminal legal system that continues to target communities of color and low-income
communities across this country, do we want to continue the damage and the devastation
that we have created through mass incarceration?

So I'm not taking position on which way you should vote, but take that into account. MZ:
She told me backstage, "I'm not sure how I'm going to vote yet." I mean, it's that
difficult, right? RS: Well, it's a little more complicated. It's the form of SB 10 as it
exists is not a bill that most of us would support, right? But eliminating cash bail is
critical. MZ: Alright, I want you to forecast into the future. What does an ideal system
look like? You have said that America is addicted to incarceration. Does there have to be
a cultural shift around that in addition to making some of the changes that you're talking
about? RS: So, you know, we have to reckon with what we've done. If we don't face head-on
how we've used our criminal legal system, and who we have targeted, and how we've defined
crime, and how we punish people, we're never going to move forward. So we are going to
have to reckon with the harm that we've caused. And in so doing, we're going to have to
shift our lens.

And that's a real challenge for us, right? We're going to have to shift our lens from a
system that's about punishment and cruelty and isolation and cages to a lens of, "What do
you need, how can we support, where have we failed, how can we make that better, how can
we restore and how can we heal?" And if we aren't willing to do that, criminal justice
reform is going to be stalled, or what comes next is going to be really problematic. It is
a fundamental shift in the way that we see our criminal justice system. And make no
mistake about it, the context of our criminal legal system is we have turned our back on
social problems, right? So we have turned our backs on homelessness and dire poverty and
structural racism and mental health challenges and addiction and even immigration status.
And instead, we have used our jails and our criminal legal system, right, to answer those
problems. And that has to change. MZ: It's not the answer. RS: We have done damage to
millions of people and in so doing, we have harmed their families and we have harmed their
communities, and we need to reckon with that. MZ: So I want to ask you finally
—

You've got some of the smartest women in the world here, surrounding you. They're
energized, they want to know what to do with that energy when they go back to their
communities. And actually I know you took some of them to see a local jail yesterday,
right? RS: I did. MZ: Can you tell us about that? RS: So, here's what we need to understand.
This problem is all of our problems. Each and every one of us is implicated in what our
criminal legal system looks like. There is no escaping that. It reflects each of us. Every
time a prosecutor gets up and says, "The people of the state of California" or "New York"
or "Idaho," they are speaking in your names. So we have to take some ownership over this.
And we really have to own the fact that this has to change and this implicates every one
of us. So what you need to do, is as I said, you need to get educated, you also need to
get proximate to this. And by getting proximate, I mean you need to go and see how our
criminal legal system operates.

That may mean go to a local criminal courthouse, sit in the back of a courtroom, and I
promise you will never be the same, it's what made me become a public defender all those
years ago. And yesterday, I took a bunch of people from the TED conference to the local
jail here. I have been coming in and out of jails for 38 years. And I have never not been
shocked, and yesterday was no exception. I was shocked, I was horrified. The conditions
were dehumanizing and degrading and horrifying — and incomprehensible if you don't
actually see it with your eyes. It was shocking. And I saw it on the faces of the people
that I was with. So we have to know that's what we're doing in the name of justice in this
country and stand up against it. But the only way you're going to do that is if you fight
back the narrative of fear that enables that to happen. And what do I mean by that? I
promise you, every single time you get into a conversation about bail reform or criminal
justice reform, here's what happens: everybody starts talking about the scary
case.

"But what about the guy who did X?" So here's what I'm here — to rest — Just have you rest
a little bit and sit with this, right? Despite the fact that we have used our criminal
legal system and destroyed millions of people, that we have harmed people, exposed them to
trauma and violence, day after day after day, the truth is, when people come home, bad
things happen rarely. It is the exception, not the rule. It is the extraordinary, not the
normal. But if you don't know that, if you don't hold on to that, if you can't support
that with data, which we can, you will be drawn into the narrative of fear that will lead
us to justify the kinds of horrors we have inflicted upon communities of color and
low-income communities and people that become ensnared in our criminal legal system for
far too long. So get educated —

Get educated, proximate, stay vigilant, do not be drawn into the narratives of fear, which
are wildly and grossly racialized anyway. Check it when you hear it, question it when
somebody says it to you, ask for the data, "Why do you say that," right? And don't get
drawn into that. And if you do, I'm actually convinced that we're at a moment where we
will build a better criminal legal system. If you get proximate to this and you actually
begin to engage in it, we will not only be a better country, each of us will be better
people. And that is a worthy goal. MZ: It's a very worthy goal.

I mean, did I hit the jackpot with my first interview, or what? She is badass. Robin
Steinberg, the Bail Project, thank you so much. RS: Thanks. MZ: I'm Manoush Zomorodi, I'm
the new host of the TED Radio Hour, and I'll see you in the spring.

<!--
ad_duration=3.33
comment_count=35
event="TEDWomen 2019"
has_talk_citation=0
intro_duration=11.82
is_subtitle_required="False"
is_talk_featured="True"
language="en"
language_swap="False"
native_language="en"
number_of_related_talks=6
number_of_speakers=2
number_of_subtitled_videos=6
number_of_tags=11
number_of_talk_download_languages=6
number_of_talk_more_resources=1
number_of_talk_recommendations=1
number_of_talks_take_actions=1
post_ad_duration=0.83
published_timestamp="2020-05-12 14:54:27"
recording_date="2019-12-04"
speaker_description="Public defender, activist"
speaker_is_published=1
speaker_name="Robin Steinberg and Manoush Zomorodi"
talk_name="The US is addicted to incarceration. Here's how to break the cycle"
talk_recommendations_blurb="More resources curated by Robin Steinberg"
talks_tags=["justice-system","criminal-justice","inequality","law","community","prison","audacious-project","united-states","social-change","activism","crime"]
url_audio="https://download.ted.com/talks/RobinSteinberg_2019W.mp3?apikey=acme-roadrunner"
url_photo_speaker="https://pe.tedcdn.com/images/ted/0898005215d52e88e5c90008c19dfd3fd5631903_254x191.jpg"
url_photo_talk="https://s3.amazonaws.com/talkstar-photos/uploads/558f6d3b-ab73-44e4-b52a-782c6c49de83/RobinSteinberg_2019W-embed.jpg"
url_webpage="https://www.ted.com/talks/robin_steinberg_and_manoush_zomorodi_the_us_is_addicted_to_incarceration_here_s_how_to_break_the_cycle"
video_type_name="TED Stage Talk"
-->