---
title: Why some anger can be good for you
speaker: Ryan Martin
description: >-
 Anger researcher Ryan Martin draws from a career studying what makes people mad
 to explain some of the cognitive processes behind anger and why a healthy dose of
 it is, in fact, useful. "Your anger exists in you because it offered your
 ancestors an evolutionary advantage," he says. "It's a powerful and healthy force
 in your life."
date: 2018-08-25
tags: ["science","mental-health","emotions","psychology","life"]
slug: ryan_martin_why_some_anger_can_be_good_for_you
---

I want you to imagine that you get a text from a friend, and it reads, "You will not
believe what just happened. I'm so mad right now." So you do the dutiful thing as a
friend, and you ask for details, and they tell you a story about what happened to them at
the gym or at work or on their date last night. You listen, and you try to understand why
they're so mad. Maybe you even secretly judge whether or not they should be so mad.

Maybe you even offer some suggestions. Now, in that moment, you are doing essentially what
I get to do every day because I'm an anger researcher, and as an anger researcher, I spend
a good part of my professional life - who am I kidding, also my personal life -

studying why people get mad. I study the types of thoughts they have when they get mad and
even what they do then, whether it's getting into fights or breaking things or even
yelling at people in all caps on the Internet. 

As you can imagine, when people hear I'm an anger researcher, they want to talk to me
about their anger and share with me their anger stories. It's not because they need a
therapist, though that does sometimes happen, it's really because anger is universal. It's
something we all feel, and it's something they can relate to. We've been feeling it since
the first few months of life, when we didn't get what we wanted and our cries of protests,
things like, "What do you mean, you won't pick up the rattle, dad? I want it!"

We feel it throughout our teenage years, as my mom can certainly attest to with me. Sorry,
mom. We feel it to the very end. In fact, anger has been with us at some of the worst
moments of our lives; it's a natural and expected part of our grief. But it's also been
with us at some of the best moments of our lives, with those special occasions like
weddings and vacations often marred by these everyday frustrations - bad weather, travel
delays - that feel horrible in the moment but then are ultimately forgotten when things go
okay. So I have many conversations with people about their anger, and through those
conversations, I've learned that many people - and I bet many people here right now - you
see anger as a problem. You see the way it interferes in your life, the way it damages
relationships, maybe even in a way that's scary. And while I get all of that, I see anger
a little differently, and today I want to tell you something important about your anger,
and it's this: Anger is a powerful and healthy force in your life.

It's good that you feel it. You need to feel it. But to understand all of that, we have to
back up and talk about why we get mad in the first place. A lot of this goes back to the
work of an anger researcher named Dr. Jerry Deffenbacher, who wrote about this back in
1996 in a book chapter on how to deal with problematic anger. For most of us - and I bet
most of you - it feels as simple as this: I get mad when I'm provoked. Right? You hear it
in the language people use. They say things like, "It makes me so mad when people drive
this slow." Or "I got mad because she left the milk out again." Or my favorite: "I don't
have an anger problem; people just need to stop messing with me." 

Now, in the spirit of better understanding those types of provocations, I ask a lot of
people, including my friends and colleagues and even family, "What are the things that
really get to you? What makes you mad?" And by the way, one of the advantages of being an
anger researcher is that I've spent more than a decade generating a comprehensive list of
all the things that really irritate my colleagues. Right? Just in case I need it.

But their answers are fascinating because they say things like, "When my sports team
loses," "People who chew too loudly." And it's surprisingly common, by the way.

"People who walk too slowly." That one's mine. And of course, roundabouts. Right?
Roundabouts. 

I can tell you honestly, there is no rage like roundabout rage. 

Sometimes their answers aren't minor at all. Sometimes they talk about racism and sexism
and bullying and environmental destruction, big global problems we all face. But
sometimes, their answers are very specific, maybe even oddly specific. "That wet line you
get across your shirt when you accidentally lean against the counter of a public
bathroom." 

Yeah, super gross, right? Or, "Flash drives - there's only two ways to plug them in, so
why does it always take me three tries?" 

Whether it's minor or major, whether it's general or specific, we can look at these
examples, and we can tease out some common themes. We get angry in situations that are
unpleasant, that feel unfair, where our goals are blocked, that could have been avoided,
and that leave us feeling powerless. This is a recipe for anger, but you can also tell
that anger is probably not the only thing we're feeling in these situations - right? Anger
doesn't happen in a vacuum. We can feel angry at the same time that we're scared or sad or
feeling a host of other emotions. But here's the thing. These provocations - they aren't
making us mad. At least not on their own, and we know that because if they were, we'd all
get angry over the same things, and we don't. The reasons I get angry are different than
the reasons you get angry, so there's got to be something else going on. What is that
something else? Well, we know what we're doing and feeling at the moment of that
provocation matters.

We call this the pre-anger state. Are you hungry, are you tired? Are you anxious about
something else, are you running late for something? When you're feeling those things,
those provocations feel that much worse. But what matters the most is not the provocation,
it's not the pre-anger state, it's this: it's how we interpret that provocation, it's how
we make sense of it in our lives. When something happens to us, we first decide: is this
good or bad; is it fair or unfair; is it blameworthy; is it punishable? That's primary
appraisal, it's when you evaluate the event itself. We decide what it means in the context
of our lives, and then, once we've done that, we decide how bad it is. That's secondary
appraisal. We say, "Is this the worst thing that's ever happened, or can I cope with
this?" To illustrate that, I want you to imagine you are driving somewhere. Before I go
any further, I should tell you if I were an evil genius, and I wanted to create a
situation that was going to make you mad, that situation would look a lot like
driving.

It's true. You are, by definition, on your way somewhere, so everything that happens -
traffic, other drivers, road construction - it feels like it's blocking your goals. There
are all these written and unwritten rules of the road, and those rules are routinely
violated right in front of you, usually without consequence. And who's violating those
rules? Anonymous others, people you will never see again, making them a very easy target
for your wrath. 

So you're driving somewhere, thus teed up to be angry, and the person in front of you is
driving well below the speed limit. It's frustrating because you can't really see why
they're driving so slow. Right? That's primary appraisal. You've looked at this and you
said, "It's bad and it's blameworthy." But maybe you also decide it's not that big a deal.
You're not in a hurry, doesn't matter. That's secondary appraisal. You don't get angry.
But now imagine you're on your way to a job interview. What that person is doing - it
hasn't changed. Right? So, primary appraisal doesn't change: still bad, still blameworthy.
But your ability to cope with it sure does because all of a sudden, you're going to be
late to that job interview. All of a sudden, you are not going to get your dream job, the
one that was going to give you piles and piles of money - right? 

Somebody else is going to get your dream job, and you're going to be broke. You're going
to be destitute. You might as well stop now, turn around, move in with your parents.

Why? Because of this person in front of me. Scratch that; this is not a person. This is a
monster. 

And this monster is here just to ruin your life. 

Now, that thought process, it's called catastrophizing, the one where we make the worst of
things. It's one of the primary types of thoughts that we know is associated with chronic
anger. But there's a couple of others. Misattributing causation. Angry people tend to put
blame where it doesn't belong, not just on people, but actually inanimate objects as well.
If you think that sounds ridiculous, think about the last time you lost your car keys, and
you said, "Where did those car keys go?" Because you know they ran off on their own.

They tend to overgeneralize. They use words like always, never, every. "This always
happens to me." "I never get what I want." Or, "I hit every stoplight on the way here
today." Demandingness - they put their own needs ahead of the needs of others. "I don't
care why this person is driving so slow. They need to speed up or move over so I can get
to this job interview." And finally, inflammatory labeling. They call people fools,
idiots, monsters, or a whole bunch of things I've been told not to say in this TED talk.

For a long time, psychologists have referred to these as cognitive distortions or even
irrational beliefs, and yes, sometimes they are irrational. Maybe even most of the time.
But sometimes, these thoughts are totally rational. There is unfairness in the world.
There are cruel, selfish people, and it's not only okay to be angry when we're treated
poorly, it's right to be angry when we're treated poorly. If there's one thing I want you
to remember from my talk today, it's this: Your anger exists in you as an emotion because
it offered your ancestors, both human and non human, with an evolutionary advantage. Just
as your fear alerts you to danger, your anger alerts you to injustice. It's one of the
ways your brain communicates to you that you have had enough. What's more, it energizes
you to confront that injustice. Think for a second about the last time you got mad. Your
heart rate increased, your breathing increased, you started to sweat.

That's your sympathetic nervous system, or fight-or-flight system, kicking in to offer you
the energy you need to respond. And that's just the stuff you noticed. At the same time,
your digestive system slowed down so you can conserve energy. That's why your mouth went
dry. Your blood vessels dilated to get blood to your extremities. That's why your face
went red. It's all part of this complex pattern of physiological experiences that exist
today because they helped your ancestors deal with cruel and unforgiving forces of nature.
The problem is that the thing your ancestors did to deal with their anger, to physically
fight, they're no longer reasonable or appropriate. You can't and you shouldn't swing a
club every time you're provoked. 

But here's the good news. You are capable of something your non-human ancestors weren't
capable of, and that is the capacity to regulate your emotions. Even when you want to lash
out, you can stop yourself, and you can channel that anger into something more productive.
So often when we talk about anger, we talk about how to keep from getting angry. We tell
people to calm down or relax; we even tell people to let it go. All of that assumes that
anger is bad, and that it's wrong to feel it. But instead, I like to think of anger as a
motivator. The same way your thirst motivates you to get a drink of water, the same way
your hunger motivates you to get a bite to eat, your anger can motivate you to respond to
injustice. Because we don't have to think too hard to find things we should be mad about.
When we go back to the beginning, yes, some of those things are silly and not worth
getting angry over, but racism, sexism, bullying, environmental destruction - those things
are real, those things are terrible, and the only way to fix them is to get mad first, and
then channel that anger into fighting back.

You don't have to fight back with aggression or hostility or violence. There are infinite
ways that you can express your anger. You can protest; you can write letters to the
editor; you can donate to and volunteer for causes. You can create art; you can create
literature; you can create poetry and music. You can create a community that cares for one
another and does not allow those atrocities to happen. So the next time you feel yourself
getting angry, instead of trying to turn it off, I hope you'll listen to what that anger
is telling you, and then I hope you'll channel it into something positive and productive.
Thank you. 

<!--
ad_duration=0
event="TEDxFondduLac"
external_start_time=0
intro_duration=0
is_subtitle_required="False"
is_talk_featured="False"
language="en"
language_swap="False"
native_language="en"
number_of_related_talks=6
number_of_speakers=1
number_of_subtitled_videos=0
number_of_tags=5
number_of_talk_download_languages=7
number_of_talk_more_resources=0
number_of_talk_recommendations=0
number_of_talks_take_actions=0
post_ad_duration=0
published_timestamp="2018-09-11 16:00:49"
recording_date="2018-08-25"
speaker_description="Psychologist"
speaker_is_published=1
speaker_name="Ryan Martin"
talk_name="Why some anger can be good for you"
talks_tags=["science","mental-health","emotions","psychology","life"]
url_photo_speaker="https://pe.tedcdn.com/images/ted/9bb130ccea0c943bcedca8b650bab34bdbce258b_254x191.jpg"
url_photo_talk="https://s3.amazonaws.com/talkstar-photos/uploads/0dd3c629-037d-4600-8b54-924766ef55d3/Ryan+Martin.001.jpeg"
url_webpage="https://www.ted.com/talks/ryan_martin_why_some_anger_can_be_good_for_you"
video_type_name="TEDx Talk"
-->