---
title: A bold plan to empower 1.6 million out-of-school girls in India
speaker: Safeena Husain
description: >-
 "Girls' education is the closest thing we have to a silver bullet to help solve
 some of the world's most difficult problems," says social entrepreneur Safeena
 Husain. In a visionary talk, she shares her plan to enroll a staggering 1.6
 million girls in school over the next five years -- combining advanced analytics
 with door-to-door community engagement to create new educational pathways for
 girls in India. (This ambitious plan is part of the Audacious Project, TED's
 initiative to inspire and fund global change.)
date: 2019-04-15
tags: ["children","education","social-change","india","technology","community","activism","teaching","audacious-project","gender-equality"]
slug: safeena_husain_a_bold_plan_to_empower_1_6_million_out_of_school_girls_in_india
---

The world today has many problems. And they're all very complicated and interconnected and
difficult. But there is something we can do. I believe that girls' education is the
closest thing we have to a silver bullet to help solve some of the world's most difficult
problems. But you don't have to take my word for it. The World Bank says that girls'
education is one of the best investments that a country can make. It helps to positively
impact nine of the 17 Sustainable Development Goals. Everything from health, nutrition,
employment â€” all of these are positively impacted when girls are educated. Additionally,
climate scientists have recently rated girls' education at number six out of 80 actions to
reverse global warming. At number six, it's rated higher than solar panels and electric
cars. And that's because when girls are educated, they have smaller families, and the
resulting reduction in population reduces carbon emissions significantly.

But more than that, you know, it's a problem we have to solve once. Because an educated
mother is more than twice as likely to educate her children. Which means that by doing it
once, we can close the gender and literacy gap forever. I work in India, which has made
incredible progress in bringing elementary education for all. However, we still have four
million out-of-school girls, one of the highest in the world. And girls are out of school
because of, obviously poverty, social, cultural factors. But there's also this underlying
factor of mindset. I have met a girl whose name was Naraaz Nath. Naaraaz means angry. And
when I asked her, "Why is your name 'angry'?" she said, "Because everybody was so angry
when a girl was born." Another girl called Antim Bala, which means the last girl. Because
everybody hoped that would be the last girl to be born. A girl called Aachuki. It means
somebody who has arrived. Not wanted, but arrived.

And it is this mindset that keeps girls from school or completing their education. It's
this belief that a goat is an asset and a girl is a liability. My organization Educate
Girls works to change this. And we work in some of the most difficult, rural, remote and
tribal villages. And how do we do it? We first and foremost find young, passionate,
educated youth from the same villages. Both men and women. And we call them Team Balika,
balika just means the girl child, so this is a team that we are creating for the girl
child. And so once we recruit our community volunteers, we train them, we mentor them, we
hand-hold them. That's when our work starts. And the first piece we do is about
identifying every single girl who's not going to school. But the way we do it is a little
different and high-tech, at least in my view. Each of our frontline staff have a
smartphone. It has its own Educate Girls app. And this app has everything that our team
needs.

It has digital maps of where they're going to be conducting the survey, it has the survey
in it, all the questions, little guides on how best to conduct the survey, so that the
data that comes to us is in real time and is of good quality. So armed with this, our
teams and our volunteers go door-to-door to every single household to find every single
girl who may either we never enrolled or dropped out of school. And because we have this
data and technology piece, very quickly we can figure out who the girls are and where they
are. Because each of our villages are geotagged, and we can actually build that
information out very, very quickly. And so once we know where the girls are, we actually
start the process of bringing them back into school. And that actually is just our
community mobilization process, it starts with village meetings, neighborhood meetings,
and as you see, individual counseling of parents and families, to be able to bring the
girls back into school.

And this can take anything from a few weeks to a few months. And once we bring the girls
into the school system, we also work with the schools to make sure that schools have all
the basic infrastructure so that the girls will be able to stay. And this would include a
separate toilet for girls, drinking water, things that will help them to be retained. But
all of this would be useless if our children weren't learning. So we actually run a
learning program. And this is a supplementary learning program, and it's very, very
important, because most of our children are first-generation learners. That means there's
nobody at home to help them with homework, there's nobody who can support their education.
Their parents can't read and write. So it's really, really key that we do the support of
the learning in the classrooms. So this is essentially our model, in terms of finding,
bringing the girls in, making sure that they're staying and learning. And we know that our
model works.

And we know this because a most recent randomized control evaluation confirms its
efficacy. Our evaluator found that over a three-year period Educate Girls was able to
bring back 92 percent of all out-of-school girls back into school.

And in terms of learning, our children's learning went up significantly as compared to
control schools. So much so, that it was like an additional year of schooling for the
average student. And that's enormous, when you think about a tribal child who's entering
the school system for the first time. So here we have a model that works; we know it's
scalable, because we are already functioning at 13,000 villages. We know it's smart,
because of the use of data and technology. We know that it's sustainable and systemic,
because we work in partnership with the community, it's actually led by the community. And
we work in partnership with the government, so there's no creation of a parallel delivery
system. And so because we have this innovative partnership with the community, the
government, this smart model, we have this big, audacious dream today. And that is to
solve a full 40 percent of the problem of out-of-school girls in India in the next five
years.

And you're thinking, that's a little ... You know, how am I even thinking about doing
that, because India is not a small place, it's a huge country. It's a country of over a
billion people. We have 650,000 villages. How is it that I'm standing here, saying that
one small organization is going to solve a full 40 percent of the problem? And that's
because we have a key insight. And that is, because of our entire approach, with data and
with technology, that five percent of villages in India have 40 percent of the
out-of-school girls. And this is a big, big piece of the puzzle. Which means, I don't have
to work across the entire country. I have to work in those five percent of the villages,
about 35,000 villages, to actually be able to solve a large piece of the problem. And
that's really key, because these villages not only have high burden of out-of-school
girls, but also a lot of related indicators, right, like malnutrition, stunting, poverty,
infant mortality, child marriage.

So by working and focusing here, you can actually create a large multiplier effect across
all of these indicators. And it would mean that we would be able to bring back 1.6 million
girls back into school.

I have to say, I have been doing this for over a decade, and I have never met a girl who
said to me, you know, "I want to stay at home," "I want to graze the cattle," "I want to
look after the siblings," "I want to be a child bride." Every single girl I meet wants to
go to school. And that's what we really want to do. We want to be able to fulfill those
1.6 million dreams. And it doesn't take much. To find and enroll a girl with our model is
about 20 dollars. To make sure that she is learning and providing a learning program, it's
another 40 dollars. But today is the time to do it. Because she is truly the biggest asset
we have. I am Safeena Husain, and I educate girls. Thank you.

<!--
ad_duration=3.33
comment_count=23
event="TED2019"
external_start_time=0
has_talk_citation=0
intro_duration=11.82
is_subtitle_required="False"
is_talk_featured="True"
language="en"
language_swap="False"
native_language="en"
number_of_related_talks=6
number_of_speakers=1
number_of_subtitled_videos=23
number_of_tags=10
number_of_talk_download_languages=23
number_of_talk_more_resources=1
number_of_talk_recommendations=0
number_of_talks_take_actions=1
post_ad_duration=0.83
published_timestamp="2019-09-23 14:50:54"
recording_date="2019-04-15"
speaker_description="Social entrepreneur"
speaker_is_published=1
speaker_name="Safeena Husain"
talk_name="A bold plan to empower 1.6 million out-of-school girls in India"
talks_tags=["children","education","social-change","india","technology","community","activism","teaching","audacious-project","gender-equality"]
url_audio="https://download.ted.com/talks/SafeenaHusain_2019.mp3?apikey=acme-roadrunner"
url_photo_speaker="https://pe.tedcdn.com/images/ted/8397c831acc45d37e17374fa82b556bfdaf63a50_254x191.jpg"
url_photo_talk="https://s3.amazonaws.com/talkstar-photos/uploads/fb96128d-921a-4af8-9db8-2af99114768a/SafeenaHusain_2019-embed.jpg"
url_webpage="https://www.ted.com/talks/safeena_husain_a_bold_plan_to_empower_1_6_million_out_of_school_girls_in_india"
video_type_name="TED Stage Talk"
-->