---
title: Want kids to learn well? Feed them well
speaker: Sam Kass
description: >-
 What can we expect our kids to learn if they're hungry or eating diets full of
 sugar and empty of nutrients? Former White House Chef and food policymaker Sam
 Kass discusses the role schools can play in nourishing students' bodies in
 addition to their minds.
date: 2015-11-02
tags: ["children","education","health","community","food","inequality","mental-health","personal-growth","society","teaching","policy"]
slug: sam_kass_want_kids_to_learn_well_feed_them_well
---

I am a chef and a food policy guy, but I come from a whole family of teachers. My sister
is a special ed teacher in Chicago. My father just retired after 25 years teaching fifth
grade. My aunt and uncle were professors. My cousins all teach. Everybody in my family,
basically, teaches except for me. They taught me that the only way to get the right
answers is to ask the right questions. So what are the right questions when it comes to
improving the educational outcomes for our children? There's obviously many important
questions, but I think the following is a good place to start: What do we think the
connection is between a child's growing mind and their growing body? What can we expect
our kids to learn if their diets are full of sugar and empty of nutrients? What can they
possibly learn if their bodies are literally going hungry? And with all the resources that
we are pouring into schools, we should stop and ask ourselves: Are we really setting our
kids up for success? Now, a few years ago, I was a judge on a cooking competition called
"Chopped." Four chefs compete with mystery ingredients to see who can cook the best
dishes.

Except for this episode — it was a very special one. Instead of four overzealous chefs
trying to break into the limelight — something that I would know nothing about —

these chefs were school chefs; you know, the women that you used to call "lunch ladies,"
but the ones I insist we call "school chefs." Now, these women — God bless these women —
spend their day cooking for thousands of kids, breakfast and lunch, with only $2.68 per
lunch, with only about a dollar of that actually going to the food. In this episode, the
main-course mystery ingredient was quinoa. Now, I know it's been a long time since most of
you have had a school lunch, and we've made a lot of progress on nutrition, but quinoa
still is not a staple in most school cafeterias.

So this was a challenge. But the dish that I will never forget was cooked by a woman named
Cheryl Barbara. Cheryl was the nutrition director at High School in the Community in
Connecticut. She cooked this delicious pasta. It was amazing. It was a pappardelle with
Italian sausage, kale, Parmesan cheese. It was delicious, like, restaurant-quality good,
except — she basically just threw the quinoa, pretty much uncooked, into the dish. It was
a strange choice, and it was super crunchy. 

So I took on the TV accusatory judge thing that you're supposed to do, and I asked her why
she did that. Cheryl responded, "Well, first, I don't know what quinoa is."

"But I do know that it's a Monday, and that in my school, at High School in the Community,
I always cook pasta."See, Cheryl explained that for many of her kids, there were no meals
on the weekends. No meals on Saturday. No meals on Sunday, either. So she cooked pasta
because she wanted to make sure she cooked something she knew her children would eat.
Something that would stick to their ribs, she said. Something that would fill them up.
Cheryl talked about how, by the time Monday came, her kids' hunger pangs were so intense
that they couldn't even begin to think about learning. Food was the only thing on their
mind. The only thing. And unfortunately, the stats — they tell the same story. So, let's
put this into the context of a child. And we're going to focus on the most important meal
of the day, breakfast. Meet Allison. She's 12 years old, she's smart as a whip and she
wants to be a physicist when she grows up.

If Allison goes to a school that serves a nutritious breakfast to all of their kids,
here's what's going to follow. Her chances of getting a nutritious meal, one with fruit
and milk, one lower in sugar and salt, dramatically increase. Allison will have a lower
rate of obesity than the average kid. She'll have to visit the nurse less. She'll have
lower levels of anxiety and depression. She'll have better behavior. She'll have better
attendance, and she'll show up on time more often. Why? Well, because there's a good meal
waiting for her at school. Overall, Allison is in much better health than the average
school kid. So what about that kid who doesn't have a nutritious breakfast waiting for him?
Well, meet Tommy. He's also 12. He's a wonderful kid. He wants to be a doctor. By the time
Tommy is in kindergarten, he's already underperforming in math. By the time he's in third
grade, he's got lower math and reading scores.

By the time he's 11, it's more likely that Tommy will have to have repeated a grade.
Research shows that kids who do not have consistent nourishment, particularly at
breakfast, have poor cognitive function overall. So how widespread is this problem? Well,
unfortunately, it's pervasive. Let me give you two stats that seem like they're on
opposite ends of the issue, but are actually two sides of the same coin. On the one hand,
one in six Americans are food insecure, including 16 million children — almost 20 percent
— are food insecure. In this city alone, in New York City, 474,000 kids under the age of
18 face hunger every year. It's crazy. On the other hand, diet and nutrition is the number
one cause of preventable death and disease in this country, by far. And fully a third of
the kids that we've been talking about tonight are on track to have diabetes in their
lifetime. Now, what's hard to put together but is true is that, many times, these are the
same children.

So they fill up on the unhealthy and cheap calories that surround them in their
communities and that their families can afford. But then by the end of the month, food
stamps run out or hours get cut at work, and they don't have the money to cover the basic
cost of food. But we should be able to solve this problem, right? We know what the answers
are. As part of my work at the White House, we instituted a program that for all schools
that had 40 percent more low-income kids, we could serve breakfast and lunch to every kid
in that school. For free. This program has been incredibly successful, because it helped us
overcome a very difficult barrier when it came to getting kids a nutritious breakfast. And
that was the barrier of stigma. See, schools serve breakfast before school, and it was
only available for the poor kids. So everybody knew who was poor and who needed government
help. Now, all kids, no matter how much or how little their parents make, have a lot of
pride. So what happened?

Well, the schools that have implemented this program saw an increase in math and reading
scores by 17.5 percent. 17.5 percent. And research shows that when kids have a consistent,
nutritious breakfast, their chances of graduating increase by 20 percent. 20 percent. When
we give our kids the nourishment they need, we give them the chance to thrive, both in the
classroom and beyond. Now, you don't have to trust me on this, but you should talk to Donna
Martin. I love Donna Martin. Donna Martin is the school nutrition director at Burke County
in Waynesboro, Georgia. Burke County is one of the poorest districts in the fifth-poorest
state in the country, and about 100 percent of Donna's students live at or below the
poverty line. A few years ago, Donna decided to get out ahead of the new standards that
were coming, and overhaul her nutrition standards. She improved and added fruit and
vegetables and whole grains. She served breakfast in the classroom to all of her
kids.

And she implemented a dinner program. Why? Well, many of her kids didn't have dinner when
they went home. So how did they respond? Well, the kids loved the food. They loved the
better nutrition, and they loved not being hungry. But Donna's biggest supporter came from
an unexpected place. His name from Eric Parker, and he was the head football coach for the
Burke County Bears. Now, Coach Parker had coached mediocre teams for years. The Bears
often ended in the middle of the pack — a big disappointment in one of the most passionate
football states in the Union. But the year Donna changed the menus, the Bears not only won
their division, they went on to win the state championship, beating the Peach County
Trojans 28-14.

And Coach Parker, he credited that championship to Donna Martin. When we give our kids the
basic nourishment, they're going to thrive. And it's not just up to the Cheryl Barbaras
and the Donna Martins of the world. It's on all of us. And feeding our kids the basic
nutrition is just the starting point. What I've laid out is really a model for so many of
the most pressing issues that we face. If we focus on the simple goal of properly
nourishing ourselves, we could see a world that is more stable and secure; we could
dramatically improve our economic productivity; we could transform our health care and we
could go a long way in ensuring that the Earth can provide for generations to come. Food
is that place where our collective efforts can have the greatest impact. So we have to ask
ourselves: What is the right question? What would happen if we fed ourselves more
nutritious, more sustainably grown food? What would be the impact?

Cheryl Barbara, Donna Martin, Coach Parker and the Burke County Bears — I think they know
the answer. Thank you guys so very much.

<!--
ad_duration=3.33
comment_count=57
event="TED Talks Live"
external_start_time=0
intro_duration=11.82
is_subtitle_required="False"
is_talk_featured="True"
language="en"
language_swap="False"
native_language="en"
number_of_related_talks=6
number_of_speakers=1
number_of_subtitled_videos=31
number_of_tags=11
number_of_talk_download_languages=31
number_of_talk_more_resources=0
number_of_talk_recommendations=0
number_of_talks_take_actions=0
post_ad_duration=0.83
published_timestamp="2017-01-05 16:11:01"
recording_date="2015-11-02"
speaker_description="Food entrepreneur"
speaker_is_published=1
speaker_name="Sam Kass"
talk_name="Want kids to learn well? Feed them well"
talks_tags=["children","education","health","community","food","inequality","mental-health","personal-growth","society","teaching","policy"]
url_audio="https://download.ted.com/talks/SamKass_2015P.mp3?apikey=acme-roadrunner"
url_photo_speaker="https://pe.tedcdn.com/images/ted/ff56a0d72fb4098c49ac6ac293d2d12f16d1ea1d_254x191.jpg"
url_photo_talk="https://s3.amazonaws.com/talkstar-photos/uploads/a5800df6-c5ae-4046-9261-1c5f9d545d58/SamKass_2015P-embed.jpg"
url_webpage="https://www.ted.com/talks/sam_kass_want_kids_to_learn_well_feed_them_well"
video_type_name="TED Stage Talk"
-->