---
title: How my son's short life made a lasting difference
speaker: Sarah Gray
description: >-
 After Sarah Gray's unborn son Thomas was diagnosed with anencephaly, a terminal
 condition, she decided to turn her family's tragedy into an extraordinary gift
 and donate his organs to scientific research. In this tribute to life and
 discovery, she shares her journey to find meaning in loss and spreads a message
 of hope for other grieving families.
date: 2015-11-18
tags: ["children","death","decisionmaking","choice","family","life","medical-research","medicine","parenting","science","tedmed"]
slug: sarah_gray_how_my_son_s_short_life_made_a_lasting_difference
---

I was three months pregnant with twins when my husband Ross and I went to my second
sonogram. I was 35 years old at the time, and I knew that that meant we had a higher risk
of having a child with a birth defect. So, Ross and I researched the standard birth
defects, and we felt reasonably prepared. Well, nothing would have prepared us for the
bizarre diagnosis that we were about to face. The doctor explained that one of our twins,
Thomas, had a fatal birth defect called anencephaly. This means that his brain was not
formed correctly because part of his skull was missing. Babies with this diagnosis
typically die in utero or within a few minutes, hours or days of being born. But the other
twin, Callum, appeared to be healthy, as far as the doctor could tell, and these twins
were identical, genetically identical. So after a lot of questions about how this could
have possibly happened, a selective reduction was mentioned, and while this procedure was
not impossible, it posed some unique risks for the healthy twin and for me, so we decided
to carry the pregnancy to term.

So there I was, three months pregnant, with two trimesters ahead of me, and I had to find
a way to manage my blood pressure and my stress. And it felt like having a roommate point
a loaded gun at you for six months. But I stared down the barrel of that gun for so long
that I saw a light at the end of the tunnel. While there was nothing we could do to
prevent the tragedy, I wanted to find a way for Thomas's brief life to have some kind of
positive impact. So I asked my nurse about organ, eye and tissue donation. She connected
with our local organ-procurement organization, the Washington Regional Transplant
Community. WRTC explained to me that Thomas would probably be too small at birth to donate
for transplant, and I was shocked: I didn't even know you could be rejected for that. But
they said that he would be a good candidate to donate for research. This helped me see
Thomas in a new light.

As opposed to just a victim of a disease, I started to see him as a possible key to unlock
a medical mystery. On March 23, 2010, the twins were born, and they were both born alive.
And just like the doctor said, Thomas was missing the top part of his skull, but he could
nurse, drink from a bottle, cuddle and grab our fingers like a normal baby, and he slept
in our arms. After six days, Thomas died in Ross's arms surrounded by our family. We called
WRTC, who sent a van to our home and brought him to Children's National Medical Center. A
few hours later, we got a call to say that the recovery was a success, and Thomas's
donations would be going to four different places. His cord blood would go to Duke
University. His liver would go to a cell-therapy company called Cytonet in Durham. His
corneas would go to Schepens Eye Research Institute, which is part of Harvard Medical
School, and his retinas would go to the University of Pennsylvania. A few days later, we
had a funeral with our immediate family, including baby Callum, and we basically closed
this chapter in our lives.

But I did find myself wondering, what's happening now? What are the researchers learning?
And was it even worthwhile to donate? WRTC invited Ross and I to a grief retreat, and we
met about 15 other grieving families who had donated their loved one's organs for
transplant. Some of them had even received letters from the people who received their
loved one's organs, saying thank you. I learned that they could even meet each other if
they'd both sign a waiver, almost like an open adoption. And I was so excited, I thought
maybe I could write a letter or I could get a letter and learn about what happened. But I
was disappointed to learn that this process only exists for people who donate for
transplant. So I was jealous. I had transplant envy, I guess.

But over the years that followed, I learned a lot more about donation, and I even got a
job in the field. And I came up with an idea. I wrote a letter that started out, "Dear
Researcher." I explained who I was, and I asked if they could tell me why they requested
infant retinas in March of 2010, and I asked if my family could visit their lab. I emailed
it to the eye bank that arranged the donation, the Old Dominion Eye Foundation, and asked
if they could send it to the right person. They said that they had never done this before,
and they couldn't guarantee a response, but they wouldn't be an obstacle, and they would
deliver it. Two days later, I got a response from Dr. Arupa Ganguly of the University of
Pennsylvania. She thanked me for the donation, and she explained that she is studying
retinoblastoma, which is a deadly cancer of the retina that affects children under the age
of five, and she said that yes, we were invited to visit her lab. So next we talked on the
phone, and one of the first things she said to me was that she couldn't possibly imagine
how we felt, and that Thomas had given the ultimate sacrifice, and that she seemed to feel
indebted to us.

So I said, "Nothing against your study, but we didn't actually pick it. We donated to the
system, and the system chose your study. I said, "And second of all, bad things happen to
children every day, and if you didn't want these retinas, they would probably be buried in
the ground right now. So to be able to participate in your study gives Thomas's life a new
layer of meaning. So, never feel guilty about using this tissue."Next, she explained to me
how rare it was. She had placed a request for this tissue six years earlier with the
National Disease Research Interchange. She got only one sample of tissue that fit her
criteria, and it was Thomas's. Next, we arranged a date for me to come visit the lab, and
we chose March 23, 2015, which was the twins' fifth birthday. After we hung up, I emailed
her some pictures of Thomas and Callum, and a few weeks later, we received this T-shirt in
the mail. A few months later, Ross, Callum and I piled in the car and we went for a road
trip.

We met Arupa and her staff, and Arupa said that when I told her not to feel guilty, that
it was a relief, and that she hadn't seen it from our perspective. She also explained that
Thomas had a secret code name. The same way Henrietta Lacks is called HeLa, Thomas was
called RES 360. RES means research, and 360 means he was the 360th specimen over the
course of about 10 years. She also shared with us a unique document, and it was the
shipping label that sent his retinas from DC to Philadelphia. This shipping label is like
an heirloom to us now. It's the same way that a military medal or a wedding certificate
might be. Arupa also explained that she is using Thomas's retina and his RNA to try to
inactivate the gene that causes tumor formation, and she even showed us some results that
were based on RES 360. Then she took us to the freezer and she showed us the two samples
that she still has that are still labeled RES 360. There's two little ones
left.

She said she saved it because she doesn't know when she might get more. After this, we
went to the conference room and we relaxed and we had lunch together, and the lab staff
presented Callum with a birthday gift. It was a child's lab kit. And they also offered him
an internship.

So in closing, I have two simple messages today. One is that most of us probably don't
think about donating to research. I know I didn't. I think I'm a normal person. But I did
it. It was a good experience, and I recommend it, and it brought my family a lot of peace.
And second is if you work with human tissue and you wonder about the donor and about the
family, write them a letter. Tell them you received it, tell them what you're working on,
and invite them to visit your lab, because that visit may be even more gratifying for you
than it is for them. And I'd also like to ask you a favor. If you're ever successful in
arranging one of these visits, please tell me about it. The other part of my family's story
is that we ended up visiting all four facilities that received Thomas's donations. And we
met amazing people doing inspiring work. The way I see it now is that Thomas got into
Harvard, Duke and Penn â€”

And he has a job at Cytonet, and he has colleagues and he has coworkers who are in the top
of their fields. And they need him in order to do their job. And a life that once seemed
brief and insignificant revealed itself to be vital, everlasting and relevant. And I only
hope that my life can be as relevant. Thank you.

<!--
ad_duration=3.33
comment_count=28
event="TEDMED 2015"
external_start_time=0
has_talk_citation=0
intro_duration=11.82
is_subtitle_required="False"
is_talk_featured="True"
language="en"
language_swap="False"
native_language="en"
number_of_related_talks=6
number_of_speakers=1
number_of_subtitled_videos=29
number_of_tags=11
number_of_talk_download_languages=30
number_of_talk_more_resources=1
number_of_talk_recommendations=1
number_of_talks_take_actions=0
post_ad_duration=0.83
published_timestamp="2016-05-02 14:58:08"
recording_date="2015-11-18"
speaker_description="Researchers' dream donator"
speaker_is_published=1
speaker_name="Sarah Gray"
talk_name="How my son's short life made a lasting difference"
talk_recommendations_blurb="Check out reading recommendations curated by Sarah Gray."
talks_tags=["children","death","decisionmaking","choice","family","life","medical-research","medicine","parenting","science","tedmed"]
talks_take_action=[]
url_audio="https://download.ted.com/talks/SarahGray_2015P.mp3?apikey=acme-roadrunner"
url_photo_speaker="https://pe.tedcdn.com/images/ted/b5fce7fa2c2eead1aa7a8b6de3214c0b540cb795_254x191.jpg"
url_photo_talk="https://s3.amazonaws.com/talkstar-photos/uploads/f5388cc9-bbc1-4541-a0de-4208e5e434ab/SarahGray_2015P-embed.jpg"
url_webpage="https://www.ted.com/talks/sarah_gray_how_my_son_s_short_life_made_a_lasting_difference"
video_type_name="TED Stage Talk"
-->