---
title: The quest for the coronavirus vaccine
speaker: Seth Berkley
description: >-
 When will the coronavirus vaccine be ready? Epidemiologist Seth Berkley (head of
 Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance) takes us inside the effort to create a vaccine for
 COVID-19. With clarity and urgency, he explains what makes it so challenging to
 develop, when we can expect it to be rolled out at scale and why we'll need
 global collaboration to get it done. (This virtual conversation is part of the
 TED Connects series, hosted by head of TED Chris Anderson and current affairs
 curator Whitney Pennington Rodgers. Recorded March 26, 2020)
date: 2020-03-26
tags: ["vaccines","disease","public-health","medicine","coronavirus","technology","global-issues","pandemic","medical-research","virus","health-care","science","ted-connects"]
slug: seth_berkley_the_quest_for_the_coronavirus_vaccine
---

Whitney Pennington Rodgers: Hello everyone, and welcome back to TEDConnects. If you're
(Audio feedback) joining us for the — If you're joining us for the first time, we've been
bringing interviews all week with some of the world's greatest minds to help us make sense
of this unprecedented moment that we're living in. I'm Whitney Pennington Rodgers, TED's
current affairs curator and one of your hosts. This week, thousands of you have tuned in
to these live events each day, and hundreds of thousands more have watched these
interviews after the fact. We've really loved seeing your questions. They add so much to
these conversations. So please keep them coming. In a few minutes, I'm going to disappear
to work with our team behind the scenes to monitor our Facebook feed, where you can leave
some of your questions. I'll work to figure out which ones are the ones that we can bring
back to our guest, and I will ask as many of them as I can during the live
interview.

Today, we're going to be touching on a subject that I think is top of mind for a lot of
people, so I'd like to turn things over to the head of TED, Chris Anderson, who will
introduce today's guest. Chris Anderson: Hello. WPR: Hi Chris. How's it going today? CA: Nice
to see you again, Whitney. It's going pretty good here. Amazing days. WPR: That's good.
That's great. We have sunshine here in the Northeast, which is nice. CA: So look, I am
excited to introduce this guest, because I've known Seth Berkley for a long time. I count
him as a friend. He's a man who has really devoted his life to the most profound questions
about public health. Vaccines are extraordinary. They save millions of lives. The quest
for a coronavirus vaccine is, I think, the biggest single question that the world faces
now if we're going to get out of this. So it's just a delight to welcome Dr. Seth Berkley
to TED Connects. Come on in, Seth. Seth Berkley: Good to see you there, Chris, and
delighted to be with you and all of the TED community. CA: Well, so look, on Tuesday, Bill
Gates was here, and he mentioned that your organization, Gavi, is really at the heart of
the quest for a vaccine.

So tell us a bit — what is Gavi? SB: So Chris, thank you for that. What's interesting is
that 20 years ago — we just celebrated our 20th anniversary — there were all these
powerful new vaccines that were being used in wealthy countries, and the challenge is,
they weren't getting to the places that they could make the most difference: the
developing world. So Gavi was formed as an alliance — WHO, the World Bank, the Gates
Foundation, UNICEF — all working together to try to bring these vaccines to the developing
world. And it's been very successful. We've launched 433 new vaccines in the most
difficult countries in the world, in the Somalias and Yemens and DRCs and Nigerias. But
we've also set up emergency stockpiles for outbreak-based vaccines, so if there's an
outbreak anywhere in the world of yellow fever or of things like cholera or meningitis and
now Ebola, we have vaccines that are available to do that.

And the last thing we are trying to do is build the health systems out to deliver these
vaccines, but also to make sure that we can pay attention to new diseases that pop up in
different parts of the world. CA: And just give us a sense of the scale of this. How many
vaccines do you distribute in a given year? And how many lives do you believe that that
may be saving? SB: So, let me give you a macro number. We've immunized more than 760
million additional children — 760 million additional children — and prevented more than 13
million deaths. In an average year, we give about a half a billion doses because we
started out with six diseases, but now we vaccinate against 18 different diseases. CA:
Yeah, the scale of that is incredible, and amidst all the bad news that's happening, it's
kind of amazing that this intervention can save so many lives. I mean, help us understand
what a vaccine is. SB: So, the original idea, the word "vaccine," comes from "vaca," or
cow.

And the observation made in the 1700s was that milkmaids had beautiful skin, whereas
everybody else had pockmarks from having gotten over smallpox. And the concept was that
she was getting infected with a zoonosis, that is, with naturally occurring cowpox, not
smallpox. That then protected against smallpox. And it was tested in those days: Could you
artificially do that? They of course didn't understand virology, they didn't understand
any of those issues. But what a vaccine is is something that you give to artificially
stimulate the immune system, hopefully to not make you sick. But then later on, when the
body comes in contact with the real disease, it thinks it's already seen it and it is able
to fight it off without making the person sick. CA: I mean, it's kind of a miraculous thing
to me that they work that way, that your body is always there looking for these threats.
And a vaccine, I guess, the body perceives it as a threat, and therefore arms itself
against that threat, right?

And that's what gives the protection. So, is that why some people are sort of —
irrationally, I will say — irrationally scared of vaccines and feel that they may be
dangerous, because they are a kind of threat that you're putting into your body in a very
subtle way? SB: Well, of course, when this first started, there were two ways to make
vaccines. You could grind them up and inject them, so-called "whole killed vaccines." So
you took organisms and you got an immune response, and sometimes those organisms, even
though they were dead, gave you a pretty whopping immune response: your arms were sore,
you got fevers. Then we moved to these weakened live viruses, and frankly, those are the
best vaccines. That's what measles is. That's what yellow fever is. These are weakened
viruses. They don't give you disease, but because they look like the natural viruses, your
body gets protection and, frankly, you get protection for your whole life.

Today, because people are worried about side effects, we've begun to use molecular biology
and use little bits of it, and therefore, it's moved forward. But the reason people are
mostly scared is because, frankly, vaccines have been so successful. You don't expect, if
you have a child or two children, that those children are going to die of these diseases,
unlike in the past, when three or four out of your five or six or seven kids would die. So
today, people think, well, gee, these diseases aren't around, they're not that bad and, by
the way, if I'm injecting these things, maybe they're not organic, maybe it'll make my
child cry, maybe it'll make them sick, and I don't need to do it. And that's the
challenge. You don't want to scare people to death on how bad these diseases can be, but
at the same time, you want them to understand that these diseases are serious and can
cause really bad disease and sequela. CA: So yesterday, you issued a really powerful call
for this massive, coordinated global response to tackle the search for a coronavirus
vaccine.

We're going to come that in a bit, because I think that's a very exciting topic. But I
think we need some more background first. I want to go back five years to when you stood
on the TED stage and you held up two candidate Ebola vaccines. This was just a few months
after Ebola had been terrifying the world. It was basically amazing how quickly those
vaccines had been developed. What happened to them? SB: It's a great question, and let me
tell a little bit of the story, but at the end, there were two vaccines. One, it turned
out, couldn't finish its testing, because the epidemic died down. The other one was fully
tested. It had a hundred percent efficacy. We then went on to work with manufacturers to
produce that vaccine, at least temporarily, in an investigational form, just in case there
were more outbreaks. There were, and those are the vaccine doses that we've used in the
DRC. In the last two outbreaks, 280,000 people have been vaccinated with this experimental
vaccine, and today, there is a licensed vaccine, and we are now procuring a global
stockpile of a half a million doses.

But let me just say, Chris, the reason they came so quickly at that moment is, after
September 11th, there was concern in the US about bioterrorism. Remember, there were
anthrax attacks. And so what happened was there was a list of agents, and Ebola, for a
short time, was on that list of agents, so people started making vaccines, and later on,
they decided that was not necessarily a good bioterrorism agent, so they dropped that off
the list. But in the freezers were vaccines that had been started, and they were dusted
off, and that's why we could move so quickly in that moment. CA: And yet, how long was it
from that moment on the TED stage with the candidate vaccine to actual deployment? SB: So,
what happened was, the epidemic began to go down. The clinical trial I told you about was
done. It was a heroic clinical trial done by WHO, and it showed that it had these results.
That epidemic then stopped. We didn't know if there were going to be more
epidemics.

It took another number of years to finish the work on the vaccine to make sure it was
pure, to figure out how to manufacture it at scale. It's during that period that we put
vaccine away and had it available in case there were other outbreaks. And it turned out,
there were three outbreaks. One went away quickly, but there were two. I was there on day
13 of the second outbreak. We injected the vaccine, cases went up, then they went down,
and controlled it. And then this DRC in North Kivu outbreak, which really was terrible
because it was in a war zone. And that's the one where we've been not only vaccinating in
DRC but in surrounding countries. By the way, that is now, I believe, day 38 or 39 out of
the 42 necessary to say it's over. We hope it is. And that would be, again, an enormous
example of what vaccines can do, even in a very difficult setting. CA: And yet, in one way,
Seth, it's kind of shocking that the outbreak that happened at the start of 2015, end of
2014, that it happened at all, because the world has known about Ebola for a long
time.

It's been sequenced and so forth. A vaccine could have been developed and got ready for a
possible outbreak. Why didn't that happen? SB: Well, there had been 26 outbreaks before,
but each one of them was small — couple of hundred people or a couple of dozen people — in
the poorest African countries in the world. There was no market for it. People didn't know
how to test it because they would just pop up and then go away. And so even though it was
obviously a disease that potentially could spread, it had never really spread before. Of
course, in West Africa, they didn't have a good surveillance system; it spread for three
months before people identified that it was Ebola, and by that time, it was too late. It
had spread. What's important about that lesson is that then caused huge disruption across
Africa, across the world, because cases went to other places. And the challenge then was,
and the reason we had to step in, was because there still was no market.

So the Gavi board said, "We will put out 390 million dollars. We'll put it out there and
tell companies, we're open for business, we'll create a market, we'll buy the vaccine."
And that led to companies being willing to finish the investment to get us to where we are
today. CA: Right, right. So it's a real paradox, right? In a way, the very thing that makes
vaccines so extraordinary, that once they're developed, they are so cheap to administer,
for a few dollars, I guess, you can administer this dose that will save someone maybe a
lifetime of illness or save their lives, and yet so much of medical research and invention
and development is done by companies who need to see a revenue stream, and so they don't
see it from those tiny little cheap things that might save a lot of lives. So it's a real
market failure that in this circumstance now — That's one of the things I guess you're
thinking hard about, how on earth do we get round and avoid that market failure crippling
the response this time? SB: Well, first of all, one of the reasons Bill Gates likes
vaccines is, in a sense, it's a little bit like software creation.

You put a lot of money and effort into creating it, but once you've got it, you can
produce it pretty cheaply and use it in different places around the world. I don't want to
beat up the pharmaceutical industry here because they were heroic in Ebola, but I think
realistically, they are for-profit entities, and they have to say to their shareholders,
"Somebody's going to pay for this, or we're going to do it as a charitable thing." And if
we do it as a charitable thing, they can't keep doing it. Since then, there is a new
initiative called CEPI, the Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations. It was set up
at Davos a few years ago, and its purpose is to try to make vaccines for the list of
diseases that aren't yet known epidemics but that can potentially be there. And the idea
would be using public sector money to get us prepared. Of course, they jumped in on this
coronavirus as well.

Last thing is, of course, I'm not worried on a coronavirus stage that this is a problem,
with not having a market. One of the challenges here is that there may be too big a market
for this, and therefore, how do we make sure there's access for developing countries. CA:
All right, so talk about this virus, Seth. How is it different from Ebola? How challenging
is it to create a vaccine for it? SB: So what's interesting about coronaviruses is that
they are animal viruses, probably primarily in bats. They jump into other animals
sometimes, and then they jump into humans. So this shouldn't have been a surprise. This is
the third coronavirus that has jumped into humans. We had SARS in early 2002, we had MERS
a number of years later, and now we have this virus. What's interesting is there is a
database that shows there are 30,000-some-odd isolated coronaviruses in animals, and one
of the things that people tried to do was say the way these coronaviruses work is they
have a spike on them.

They're called "corona" because they look like the sun. That spike is where it attaches to
a certain receptor in people's lungs. And so somebody said, well, maybe we can begin to
look at those spikes and see if they're similar to the human receptors and they can be
predicted. But the problem is people don't invest in those types of research. And, of
course, I think that, given it's an evolutionary certainty, we're going to see this, that
we should be. But one other point about this is coronavirus jumped into humans in ancient
history as well, and so we have now about a third to a quarter of the common cold viruses
are actually coronaviruses. And what's interesting about those is they don't make you
deathly ill like these, but you also don't have long-term immunity to them, so you can get
reinfected with these viruses after 10 months, a year. And so that does raise an issue on
vaccinology, because you want to ideally have lifetime immunity. CA: The reason why we get
reinfected is because the virus mutates slightly, and so it escapes the antibodies? SB: No,
no, not in this case.

Not in this case. So in flu, that's what happens. The viruses are always mutating. In HIV,
the reason we don't have a vaccine is because they're all mutating. In this case, the
immune response seems to get weaker and go away, and people get reinfected with the same
viruses. Now, that is potentially a solvable problem using vaccinology and many different
techniques, but the point is, we just can't assume. Some people now are talking about herd
immunity as a way to deal with this virus, and the idea there is if you could get enough
people infected — you know, forget for a moment that a lot of people are going to die and
be miserable while that happens — but the idea is that you get a certain level immunity in
the community, and then the disease will go away. Well, that is only true if you get
long-term immunity. If you don't, then you could go through all of that horrible
experience, have all those deaths, and then not have the protection you need to protect
against this disease. CA: OK, so in a way, the quest we're looking for is a vaccine that
will work for the long term.

I mean, I guess any vaccine that works at all will be a huge gift, but it could well be
one that we have to retake every year, or something like that. SB: Right. That is certainly
possible. Of course, we have to remember, though, that SARS and MERS both had even higher
mortality than this virus does, and they give a much more profound immune response. So it
may be that they react differently than the common cold viruses. The challenge, of course,
is that we haven't had the opportunity to study these over a long time, and this new
disease — three and a half months, we've had it. More science has been done for this
disease in this short period of time, but we don't understand fully the epidemiology of
the virus, the immune response, what's protective, which is the best animal model. All of
that is being worked on by science and at breakneck pace, but a lot to learn. CA: So talk
about how the medical and the research community responded.

Because, the Chinese authorities — I guess we heard it yesterday — only found out about
this sometime in December. Already, early in January — I think the virus started in
November, they found out about it in December — by early January, they had already
released a sequence of the virus to the world, and now here we are. And I think I saw that
more than 40 companies are already claiming candidate vaccines. What does it mean to have
a candidate vaccine? Like, have companies tested this already against animals or
something? Or are they just looking at a computer model where they go, "That should
work"?SB: Well, it's an interesting question you ask there. So first of all, China was
heroic on this. They did post the genetic sequence of it. Today, we have companies that
can sit down with a computer and from that genetic sequence, make what is a candidate
vaccine. Now, a candidate vaccine obviously means it's not a licensed product. It's
something that somebody wants to work on.

But you're right, you have to have the right nomenclature, because "candidate" can mean
I'm working on something, it's in my head, I'm just doing a little work on it, I've got
something in a vial, I'm beginning to do testing on it. And so what we saw in that case
was a company called Moderna. That was the first vaccine that went into humans. It's a
messenger RNA-based system. I actually visited the company, not in this outbreak but
before, because the technology is interesting. And what they were able to do was, in 42
days, make a candidate vaccine from the genetic sequence. They didn't need the organism.
That now is in clinical testing. Now, there is no licensed mRNA vaccine, so we're going to
have to figure out, is it safe? Does it work in different age groups? How are we going to
scale it up? All of that. But there are many others who are using conventional
vaccinology. An example would be, the French are working on a measles-based
vaccine.

The idea is to put the spiked protein in the measles vector, and it takes a little bit
longer to do that work, but once you have that done, of course, we know how to make
measles vaccine. We make hundreds and hundreds and hundreds of millions of doses and
provide it to the whole world. If that was to work, that might be easier to scale up. So I
think what we want in the race is to have multiple different vaccines moving forward. We
don't want one or two. We don't want a hundred in the late stages, because it's expensive
and hard to do. But we want to have a diversity of science approaches going forward. CA:
Which of the other candidates out there are you excited by or at least intrigued by? SB:
Well, for me, the critical issue here is going to be we have to optimize for speed, and so
that means, as I said, having examples of all the different new technologies that could
potentially work, as well as conventional doses moving forward at the same
time.

So what you're going to want to do is have this bubble up. And it's not just companies, or
big companies. It's also biotech companies. It's also academic researchers that are
working on this. You want all of those to bubble up. Then you want to be able to look at
what's the most promising, and that will depend upon animal results. It'll depend upon
being able to produce those vaccines, have a pathway, and eventually, you will want to put
those into human clinical trials. That requires a certain amount of safety work. You can
try to accelerate that. But then you need to say, OK, we need to know, do we need one
dose, do we need multiple doses, do we need 50 micrograms, 100, 150? Do we need a chemical
stimulant we call an adjuvant? Given that this disease, its big problems in outcomes are
in the elderly, we might need to put some stimulants in to make it a more potent immune
response. So all of that work has to go on. That's what the clinical testing
is.

Eventually you say, "Aha! Here's the vaccine we're going to use." Now you test it in an
efficacy trial. And that is to see, does it work? And at that point, you then have a
vaccine that you know works. But there is a stage after that, and that stage is, you've
got to work out the manufacturing, have it all worked out so that the regulators know that
you can really make this, and that it's pure, it doesn't have any problems with it. And
during that period, and that's what we did in Ebola, we were able to use those vaccines to
help in outbreaks under a clinical trial protocol while monitoring them and learning. So
there's a lot of steps there, and it's complicated, and I've shortened it a little bit. CA:
But summarize the steps that they basically need to go through. I heard probably an animal
test, and then —SB: Well, for example, Moderna. They went into humans at the same time
they're doing animal testing. We don't have a perfect animal model.

But normally it takes 10 to 15 years to do this, and that's the compression you're trying
to do here. So the challenge is, we can compress all those different clinical trials. The
basic way you think about it is, preclinical studies, animals, understanding it, purity,
reproducibility. Then you move into human studies. You start off with a small number of
healthy people. You then work on the dosing, how much, how often. Then you move into
people at risk for the disease — that might be in this case the elderly or people with
other conditions — and then eventually do an efficacy trial. Now, one of the cool new
things we can do today is something called "adaptive trial design." So rather than do
these sequentially, what you can begin to do is enroll people and then, as you get the
data you need, you can just begin to bring in the next set of groups, and by doing that,
you can speed it up dramatically. CA: When you say enroll people, you mean enroll people
who have their eyes wide open.

They have informed consent. I think that's the term. SB: Absolutely. CA: And they're willing
to, I guess, take the risk that this isn't a fully tested vaccine but it may well be
efficacious, and so that obviously can help a lot. That's crucial to this, right? SB:
Absolutely. They are the unsung heroes of vaccinology, because people go out, they
volunteer to take a substance, particularly early on, that don't know how it's going to
react. Is it going to make the disease worse? Make it better? Is it going to protect them?
Is it going to make them sick? So you try to predict that if you can with animals, but
people do do that, and the informed consent says not only you may have these side effects
or these problems, but also this vaccine may not work. And so it's important for people to
understand that, because you don't want people to go and put themselves at high risk,
saying, "Oh, gee, I had a vaccine, and so I'm protected." We don't know that until we get
to the efficacy stage of trials. CA: But Seth, even putting together all those dots, what
I've heard most people say is that it is likely to take at least 18 months before the
world will have a vaccine available at any kind of scale.

Is that time line right? And can the world remotely afford 18 months on this? SB: Well, I
think, you know, I've given you many questions. I could raise lots more questions. So part
of it's going to be luck: How easy is this particular candidate vaccine going to be? How
lucky will we be in getting a good immune response? Which approaches will work? Will they
be scalable? So I think there's lot of questions there. The world will do everything they
can to squeeze it down, but I think that's the time line we're talking about. And
remember, it's 10 to 15 years usually. In the case of Ebola, we did it in five years to a
licensed product. In this case, we are hoping to squeeze it down dramatically, but there
are many things we're going to have to go through, and it's really about making sure that
vaccine works and it is safe for use in what ultimately may be billions of people. CA:
Whitney. WPR: Hi. So we have lots of questions coming in, Seth.

One of them that's kind of related to this is, you know, a lot of us right now are
isolating, and we're not building our exposure to this virus, so how will that affect us
in the long term? Will this make us vulnerable to the virus until a vaccine is
available? SB: So that's a great question, and, as you know, we don't fully understand the
epidemiology of this virus, but there is some sense that there may be asymptomatics. Do
they get immune protection? Are they afterwards resistant to infection? We don't know
that, but we do know that people do get sick, including young people, and that sickness
can be quite severe. Obviously, a lot of it is mild, but some of it is quite severe, and
then it gets more severe in the elderly. So I wouldn't recommend that anybody go out and
intentionally try to get exposed to this virus now. The whole idea of having isolation now
is to try to stop the chains of transmission, protect health workers in hospitals, with
the idea being that if you can suppress it enough — and Bill talked about this in his talk
— and later on have testing available, you might be able to go back to somewhat of a
normal life and then watch for reintroduction of this virus.

Of course, at the end of the day, we will probably need a vaccine to be able to completely
control that, but the experiment is going on, in China ... Japan has done an amazing job
of controlling this with slightly less severe interventions. We've seen in Korea similar
things. So the hope would be that if we take it seriously, we actually damp down the
exposures and stop this epidemic now, we'll be able to remove to some form of normalcy.
And we also may have drugs, and drugs will change the dynamics as well, because people
will then know that they are able to get treatment as well. WPR: Great. I'll be back later
with other questions I'm seeing. SB: Thanks, Whitney. CA: Thanks, Whitney. Thanks everyone
watching. Keep those questions coming. Seth, this time line, I've been puzzled about this,
because I get that there are so many things that have to be checked out, but I still worry
that the rules are not adapting rapidly enough for the scale of the emergency.

I mean, my analogy would be: you're going about your lives, and suddenly there's this
emergency, you see that there's this enemy force approaching you from the horizon and
coming your direction. You don't, in that circumstance, spend a week trying to test all
your guns and make sure they're operating absolutely safely and in the right way. You
galvanize and you do take some additional risk for the sake of avoiding the bigger risk.
Is that thinking prevalent right now? Are there people trying to make those kinds of
trade-offs? How should we think about that? Or do you really believe that the community is
galvanizing and moving forward as fast as it humanly can and appropriately balancing the
two risks? SB: I think we're seeing heroics in moving forward here. Obviously, you're
right, and the reason we talk about going from 10 to 15 years down to something like 18
months is about squeezing those steps as much as possible. The regulators in the Ebola
experience were really fabulous.

They worked with us and tried to keep any bureaucratic delays down to the smallest amount
possible. And I think that's what's going to be important here, is we have to look at
every single step and say, "Is it critical?" But you do need to answer a lot of these
questions. For example, if you have a vaccine that works in healthy people, it very well
may not give an immune response to the elderly. We may need to change that vaccine to make
it work there. It may not work in young children. So you need a certain amount of studies
done. Of course, if you work in areas that have big outbreaks, you're able to also enroll
more quickly and follow people more quickly. That's one of the reasons we'll have to think
about this globally, because we don't know in 12 to 18 months, or even six to 18 months,
if we're really lucky, where the epidemic will be raging and where we want to do the
clinical trials.

We should be prepared to do them wherever in the world it's possible, and also do some in
different types of countries. Developing countries may have different immune responses
than in wealthy countries. CA: What alarms me a bit is that on the models I've looked at,
with the possible exception of what happened in China and Japan, by distancing, we can
bend the curve, we can reduce infection. But as soon as you go back to normal, there's
this huge risk of a massive resurge, and until the vaccine comes along, it feels like your
choices are: one, sort of recklessly expose the whole population to the bug and develop
some kind of herd immunity, or try and do this scary dance of really cramping down on the
economy and all the risks that are associated with that, and risking, if you lift the lid
on that, risking these really dangerous second surges. So is that the right way to think
about it? There's a scenario where, until this happens, and if it's 18 months, that's an
incredibly long time for the world to be in that sort of dangerous, scary dance. SB: Well,
I think the issue here is that is a little bit the way to think of it, but the experiment
is going on now.

China is now releasing its controls, and we will see what happens there. We'll see where
they have to clamp back down and what's going to happen, and we'll get a good idea of what
that's like. Right now, in many countries, we're still in the upscale period when we're
seeing lots of cases. And so we have to break that transmission first before we can have
that conversation. I'm the first person that would like a vaccine to occur quicker, and,
of course, my job is to underpromise and overdeliver, not the other way around. And I
think we have to be careful not to think about, "Oh, we can just have a vaccine in a
couple of months." It may be that we're lucky. It may be that it's easy to do. It may be
the first few candidates will show promise, we get efficacy, we can scale those up for at
least some limited use while it's being worked out. But a lot of things have to fall in
place for that to happen.

And that's why we want to have an organized, global effort to absolutely incentivize the
best possible chance for that to happen in the fastest way. CA: There's some kind of debate
out there about whether there might be way, way more cases, mild cases, basically
zero-symptom cases of coronavirus out there that may have granted more people immunity
than we know. Is that a credible suggestion? More cases and much lower fatality rate than
we know, because so many of the cases could be invisible? SB: You know, Mayor Bloomberg
used to have a saying that I loved. He said, "In God we trust. Everybody else, bring
data." And I think the answer here is we haven't done enough testing to know, and we
started out with PCR tests to look for virus, and therefore, if you had recovered, didn't
have the virus anymore, we weren't able to pick it up. Now there are beginning to be
antibody tests to look to see if you've been exposed and don't have the virus now but have
an immune response to it.

Once we have those tests operating at scale, we'll be able to understand what the
epidemiology is and what's happening, and then we'll be in a much better place to
understand how this is playing out. Also, I mean, even the question: We don't see a lot of
cases in children — is that because the children get infected but they don't get symptoms,
and ther

<!--
ad_duration=3.33
comment_count=28
event="TED Connects"
external_duration=0
external_start_time=0
has_talk_citation=0
intro_duration=11.82
is_subtitle_required="False"
is_talk_featured="True"
language="en"
language_swap="False"
native_language="en"
number_of_related_talks=6
number_of_speakers=3
number_of_subtitled_videos=1
number_of_tags=13
number_of_talk_download_languages=1
number_of_talk_more_resources=1
number_of_talk_recommendations=0
number_of_talks_take_actions=1
post_ad_duration=0.83
published_timestamp="2020-03-27 16:36:31"
recording_date="2020-03-26"
speaker_description="Vaccine visionary"
speaker_is_published=1
speaker_name="Seth Berkley"
talk_name="The quest for the coronavirus vaccine"
talks_tags=["vaccines","disease","public-health","medicine","coronavirus","technology","global-issues","pandemic","medical-research","virus","health-care","science","ted-connects"]
url_photo_speaker="https://pe.tedcdn.com/images/ted/f3f9291eaccddabeec1ce621be929ade7a8b50c4_254x191.jpg"
url_photo_talk="https://s3.amazonaws.com/talkstar-photos/uploads/52089556-161c-4332-b9e4-2094e361b1bb/SethBerkley_2020V-embed.jpg"
url_webpage="https://www.ted.com/talks/seth_berkley_the_quest_for_the_coronavirus_vaccine"
video_type_name="Original Content"
-->