---
title: How do you build a sacred space?
speaker: Siamak Hariri
description: >-
 To design the Bahá'í Temple of South America, architect Siamak Hariri focused on
 illumination -- from the temple's form, which captures the movement of the sun
 throughout the day, to the iridescent, luminous stone and glass used to construct
 it. Join Hariri for a journey through the creative process, as he explores what
 makes for a sacred experience in a secular world.
date: 2017-03-08
tags: ["architecture","art","design","collaboration","community","faith","engineering","innovation","materials","public-spaces","religion","technology","society","tednyc"]
slug: siamak_hariri_how_do_you_build_a_sacred_space
---

The school of architecture that I studied at some 30 years ago happened to be across the
street from the wonderful art gallery designed by the great architect Louis Kahn. I love
the building, and I used to visit it quite often. One day, I saw the security guard run
his hand across the concrete wall. And it was the way he did it, the expression on his
face — something touched me. I could see that the security guard was moved by the building
and that architecture has that capacity to move you. I could see it, and I remember
thinking, "Wow. How does architecture do that?"At school, I was learning to design, but
here — here was a reaction of the heart. And it touched me to the core. You know, you
aspire for beauty, for sensuousness, for atmosphere, the emotional response. That's the
realm of the ineffable and the immeasurable. And that's what you live for: a chance to
try. So in 2003, there was an open call for designs for the Bahá'í Temple for South
America.

This was the first temple in all of South America. It's a continental temple, a hugely
important milestone for the Bahá'í community, because this would be the last of the
continental temples and would open the door for national and local temples to be built
around the world. And the brief was deceptively simple and unique in the annals of
religion: a circular room, nine sides, nine entrances, nine paths, allowing you to come to
the temple from all directions, nine symbolizing completeness, perfection. No pulpit, no
sermons, as there are no clergy in the Bahá'í faith. And in a world which is putting up
walls, the design needed to express in form the very opposite. It had to be open,
welcoming to people of all faiths, walks of life, backgrounds, or no faith at all; a new
form of sacred space with no pattern or models to draw from. It was like designing one of
the first churches for Christianity or one of the first mosques for Islam. So we live in a
secular world.

How do you design sacred space today? And how do you even define what's sacred today? I
stumbled across this beautiful quote from the Bahá'í writings, and it speaks to prayer. It
says that if you reach out in prayer, and if your prayer is answered — which is already
very interesting — that the pillars of your heart will become ashine. And I loved this idea
of the inner and the outer, like when you see someone and you say, "That person is
radiant." And I was thinking, "My gosh, how could we make something architectural out of
that, where you create a building and it becomes alive with light? Like alabaster, if you
kiss it with light, it becomes alive. And I drew this sketch, something with two layers,
translucent with structure in between capturing light. Maybe a pure form, a single form of
emanation that you could imagine would be all dome and everything we kept making was
looking too much like an egg.

A blob. So you search. You all know this crazy search, letting the process take you, and
you live for the surprises. And I remember quite by accident I saw this little video of a
plant moving in light, and it made me think of movement, reach, this idea that the temple
could have reach, like this reach for the divine. You can imagine also that movement
within a circle could mean movement and stillness, like the cosmos, something you see in
many places.

But rotation was not enough, because we needed a form. In the Bahá'í writings, it talks
about the temples being as perfect as is humanly possible, and we kept thinking, well,
what is perfection? And I remember I stumbled into this image of this Japanese basket and
thinking our Western notions of perfection need to be challenged, that this wonderful
silhouette of this basket, this wonkiness, and that it has the kind of dimple of what you
might imagine a shoulder or the cheekbone, and that kind of organic form. And so we drew
and made models, these lines that merge at the top, soft lines, which became like drapery
and translucent veils and folding, and the idea of not only folding but torquing — you
remember the plant and the way it was reaching. And this started to become an interesting
form, carving the base, making the entrances. And then we ended up with this. This is this
temple with two layers, nine luminous veils, embodied light, soft-flowing lines like
luminescent drapery.

180 submissions were received from 80 countries, and this was selected. So we went to the
next stage of how to build it. We had submitted alabaster. But alabaster was too soft, and
we were experimenting, many experiments with materials, trying to think how we could have
this kind of shimmer, and we ended up with borosilicate. And borosilicate glass, as you
know, is very strong, and if you break borosilicate rods just so and melt them at just the
right temperature, we ended up with this new material, this new cast glass which took us
about two years to make. And it had this quality that we loved, this idea of the embodied
light, but on the inside, we wanted something with a soft light, like the inner lining of
a jacket. On the outside you have protection, but on the inside you touch it. So we found
this tiny vein in a huge quarry in Portugal with this beautiful stone, which the owner had
kept for seven generations in his family, waiting for the right project, if you can
believe it.

Look at this material, it's beautiful. And the way it lights up; it has that translucent
quality. So here you see the structure. It lets the light through. And looking down, the
nine wings are bound, structurally but symbolically strong, a great symbol of unity: pure
geometry, a perfect circle, 30 meters in section and in plan, perfectly symmetrical, like
the idea of sacredness and geometry. And here you see the building going up, 2,000 steel
nodes, 9,000 pieces of steel, 7,800 stone pieces, 10,000 cast glass pieces, all individual
shapes, the entire superstructure all described, engineered, fabricated with aerospace
technology, prefabricated machine to machine, robotically, a huge team effort, you can
imagine, of literally hundreds, and within three percent of our $30 million budget set in
2006.

Nine wings bound together forming a nine-pointed star, and the star shape moving in space,
tracking the sun. So here it is. Audience: Wow!

Hopefully, a befitting response to that beautiful quote, "a prayer answered," open in all
directions, capturing the blue light of dawn, tent-like white light of day, the gold light
of the afternoon, and of course, at night, the reversal: sensuous, catching the light in
all kinds of mysterious ways. And the site: it's interesting; 14 years ago when we made the
submission, we showed the temple set against the Andes. We didn't have the Andes as our
site, but after nine years, that's exactly where we ended up, the lines of the temple set
against nothing but pure nature, and you turn around and you get nothing but the city
below you, and inside, a view in all directions, radiating gardens from each of the
alcoves, radiating paths. Last October, the opening ceremonies — a beautiful, sacred event,
5,000 people from 80 countries, a continuous river of visitors, indigenous people from all
over South America, some who had never left their villages.

And of course, that this temple belongs to people, the collective, of many cultures and
walks of life, many beliefs, and for me, what's most important is what it feels like on
the inside; that it feel intimate, sacred, and that everyone is welcome. And if even a few
who come have the same reaction as that security guard, then it truly would be their
temple. And I would love that. Thank you.

<!--
ad_duration=3.33
comment_count=30
event="TEDNYC"
external_start_time=0
has_talk_citation=0
intro_duration=11.82
is_subtitle_required="False"
is_talk_featured="True"
language="en"
language_swap="False"
native_language="en"
number_of_related_talks=6
number_of_speakers=1
number_of_subtitled_videos=23
number_of_tags=14
number_of_talk_download_languages=23
number_of_talk_more_resources=0
number_of_talk_recommendations=0
number_of_talks_take_actions=0
post_ad_duration=0.83
published_timestamp="2017-04-17 14:48:33"
recording_date="2017-03-08"
speaker_description="Architect"
speaker_is_published=1
speaker_name="Siamak Hariri"
talk_more_resources=[]
talk_name="How do you build a sacred space?"
talks_tags=["architecture","art","design","collaboration","community","faith","engineering","innovation","materials","public-spaces","religion","technology","society","tednyc"]
talks_take_action=[]
url_audio="https://download.ted.com/talks/SiamakHariri_2017S.mp3?apikey=acme-roadrunner"
url_photo_speaker="https://pe.tedcdn.com/images/ted/3acc4d46d958de6ded2203df56bd0996cb0a787c_254x191.jpg"
url_photo_talk="https://s3.amazonaws.com/talkstar-photos/uploads/5de6699f-5eaa-425f-a8fb-673451bfed4d/SiamakHariri_2017S-embed.jpg"
url_webpage="https://www.ted.com/talks/siamak_hariri_how_do_you_build_a_sacred_space"
video_type_name="TED Stage Talk"
-->