---
title: We need to track the world's water like we track the weather
speaker: Sonaar Luthra
description: >-
 We need a global weather service for water, says entrepreneur and TED Fellow
 Sonaar Luthra. In a talk about environmental accountability, Luthra shows how we
 could forecast water shortages and risks with a global data collection effort --
 just like we monitor the movement of storms -- and better listen to what the
 earth is telling us.
date: 2019-07-20
tags: ["water","sustainability","climate-change","resources","environment","future","science","weather","innovation","ted-fellows"]
slug: sonaar_luthra_we_need_to_track_the_world_s_water_like_we_track_the_weather
---

We need to build a weather service for water. Yet, until we collectively demand
accountability, the incentives to fund it will not exist. The first time I spoke at a
conference was here at TED, eight years ago. Fresh out of grad school, little did I know
that in those few minutes onstage, I was framing the questions I was going to be asked for
the next decade. And, like too many 20-somethings, I expected to solve the world's
problems — more specifically, the world's water problems — with my technology. I had a lot
to learn. It was seductive, believing that our biggest water quality problems persist
because they're so hard to identify. And I presumed that we just needed simpler, faster
and more affordable sensors. I was wrong. While it's true that managing tomorrow's water
risk is going to require better data and more technology, today we're barely using the
little water data that we have. Our biggest water problems persist because of what we
don't do and the problems we fail to acknowledge.

There's actually little question about what today's water data is telling us to do as a
species: we need to conserve more, and we need to pollute less. But today's data is not
going to help us forecast the emerging risks facing businesses and markets. It's rapidly
becoming useless for that. It used to carry more value, but it's never actually told us
with any real accuracy how much water we have or what's in it. Let's consider the past
decade of water usage statistics from each of the G20 nations. Now, what these numbers do
not tell you is that none of these countries directly measures how much water they use.
These are all estimates, and they're based on outdated models that don't consider the
climate crisis, nor do they consider its impact on water. In 2015, Chennai, India's
sixth-largest city, was hit with the worst floods it had seen in a century. Today, its
water reservoirs are nearly dry. It took three years to get here, three years of
subaverage rainfall.

Now, that's faster than most nations tabulate their national water data, including the US.
And although there were forecasts that predicted severe shortages of water in Chennai,
none of them could actually help us pinpoint exactly when or where this was going to
happen. This is a new type of water problem, because the rate at which every aspect of our
water cycle changes is accelerating. As a recent UN warning this month revealed, we are
now facing one new climate emergency every single week. There are greater uncertainties
ahead for water quality. It's rare in most countries for most water bodies to be tested
for more than a handful of contaminants in a year. Instead of testing, we use what's
called the "dilution model" to manage pollution. Now, imagine I took an Olympic-sized
swimming pool, I filled it with fresh water and I added one drop of mercury. That would
dilute down to one part per billion mercury, which is well within what the World Health
Organization considers safe.

But if there was any unforeseen drop in how much water was available — less groundwater,
less stream flow, less water in the pool — less dilution would take place, and things
would get more toxic. So this is how most countries are managing pollution. They use this
model to tell them how much pollution is safe. And it has clear weaknesses, but it worked
well enough when we had abundant water and consistent weather patterns. Now that we don't,
we're going to need to invest and develop new data-collection strategies. But before we do
that, we have to start acting on the data we already have. This is a jet fuel fire. As many
of you may be aware, jet fuel emissions play an enormous role in climate change. What you
might not be aware of is that the US Department of Defense is the world's largest consumer
of jet fuel. And when they consume jet fuel, they mandate the use of the firefighting foam
pictured here, which contains a class of chemicals called PFAS.

Nobody uses more of this foam than the US Department of Defense, and every time it's used,
PFAS finds its way into our water systems. Globally, militaries have been using this foam
since the 1970s. We know PFAS causes cancer, birth defects, and it's now so pervasive in
the environment that we seem to find it in nearly every living thing we test, including
us. But so far, the US Department of Defense has not been held accountable for PFAS
contamination, nor has it been held liable. And although there's an effort underway to
phase out these firefighting foams, they're not embracing safer, effective alternatives.
They're actually using other PFAS molecules, which may, for all we know, carry worse
health consequences. So today, government accountability is eroding to the point of
elimination, and the risk of liability from water pollution is vanishing. What types of
incentives does this create for investing in our water future?

Over the past decade, the average early stage global investment in early stage water
technology companies has totaled less than 30 million dollars every year. That's 0.12
percent of global venture capital for early stage companies. And public spending is not
going up nearly fast enough. And a closer look at it reveals that water is not a priority.
In 2014, the US federal government was spending 11 dollars per citizen on water
infrastructure, versus 251 dollars on IT infrastructure. So when we don't use the data we
have, we don't encourage investment in new technologies, we don't encourage more data
collection and we certainly don't encourage investment in securing a water future. So are
we doomed? Part of what I'm still learning is how to balance the doom and the urgency with
things we can do, because Greta Thunberg and the Extinction Rebellion don't want our hope
— they want us to act. So what can we do?

It's hard to imagine life without a weather service, but before modern weather
forecasting, we had no commercial air travel, it was common for ships to be lost at sea,
and a single storm could produce a food shortage. Once we had radio and telegraph
networks, all that was necessary to solve these problems was tracking the movement of
storms. And that laid the foundation for a global data collection effort, one that every
household and every business depends upon today. And this was as much the result of
coordinated and consistent data collection as it was the result of producing a culture
that saw greater value in openly assessing and sharing everything that it could find out
and discover about the risks we face. A global weather service for water would help us
forecast water shortages. It could help us implement rationing well before reservoirs run
dry. It could help us detect contamination before it spreads.

It could protect our supply chains, secure our food supplies, and, perhaps most
importantly, it would enable the precise estimation of risk necessary to insure against
it. We know we can do this because we've already done it with weather. But it's going to
require resources. We need to encourage greater investment in water. Investors, venture
capitalists: a portion of your funds and portfolios should be dedicated to water. Nothing
is more valuable and, after all, businesses are going to need to understand water risks in
order to remain competitive in the world we are entering. Aside from venture capital,
there are also lots of promising government programs that encourage economic development
through tax incentives. A new option in the US that my company is using is called
"opportunity zones." They offer favorable tax treatment for investing capital gains in
designated distressed and low-income areas.

Now, these are areas that are also facing staggering water risk, so this creates crucial
incentives to work directly with the communities who need help most. And if you're not
looking to make this type of investment but you own land in the US, did you know that you
can leverage your land to conserve water quality permanently with a conservation easement?
You can assign the perpetual right to a local land trust to conserve your land and set
specific water quality goals. And if you meet those goals, you can be rewarded with a
substantial tax discount every year. How many areas could our global community protect
through these and other programs? They're powerful because they offer the access to real
property necessary to lay the foundation for a global weather service for water. But this
can only work if we use these programs as they are intended and not as mere vehicles for
tax evasion. When the conservation easement was established, nobody could anticipate how
ingrained in environmental movements corporate polluters would become.

And we've become accustomed to companies talking about the climate crisis while doing
nothing about it. This has undermined the legacy and the impact of these programs, but it
also makes them ripe for reclamation. Why not use conservation easements as they were
intended, to set and reach ambitious conservation goals? Why not create opportunities in
opportunity zones? Because fundamentally, water security requires accountability.
Accountability is not corporate polluters sponsoring environmental groups and museums.
Those are conflicts of interest.

Accountability is: making the risk of liability too expensive to continue polluting and
wasting our water. We can't keep settling for words. It's time to act. And where better to
start than with our biggest polluters, particularly the US Department of Defense, which is
taxpayer-funded. Who and what are we protecting when US soldiers, their families and the
people who live near US military bases abroad are all drinking toxic water? Global
security can no longer remain at odds with protecting our planet or our collective health.
Our survival depends on it. Similarly, agriculture in most countries depends on
taxpayer-funded subsidies that are paid to farmers to secure and stabilize food supplies.
These incentives are a crucial leverage point for us, because agriculture is responsible
for consuming 70 percent of all the water we use every year. Fertilizer and pesticide
runoff are the two biggest sources of water pollution.

Let's restructure these subsidies to demand better water efficiency and less
pollution.

Finally: we can't expect progress if we're unwilling to confront the conflicts of interest
that suppress science, that undermine innovation and that discourage transparency. It is
in the public interest to measure and to share everything we can learn and discover about
the risks we face in water. Reality does not exist until it's measured. It doesn't just
take technology to measure it. It takes our collective will. Thank you.

<!--
ad_duration=3.33
comment_count=23
event="TEDSummit 2019"
external_start_time=0
has_talk_citation=0
intro_duration=11.82
is_subtitle_required="False"
is_talk_featured="True"
language="en"
language_swap="False"
native_language="en"
number_of_related_talks=6
number_of_speakers=1
number_of_subtitled_videos=14
number_of_tags=10
number_of_talk_download_languages=14
number_of_talk_more_resources=0
number_of_talk_recommendations=1
number_of_talks_take_actions=2
post_ad_duration=0.83
published_timestamp="2019-09-20 14:52:47"
recording_date="2019-07-20"
speaker_description="Water risk forecaster"
speaker_is_published=1
speaker_name="Sonaar Luthra"
talk_more_resources=[]
talk_name="We need to track the world's water like we track the weather"
talk_recommendations_blurb="More resources curated by Sonaar Luthra"
talks_tags=["water","sustainability","climate-change","resources","environment","future","science","weather","innovation","ted-fellows"]
url_audio="https://download.ted.com/talks/SonaarLuthra_2019T.mp3?apikey=acme-roadrunner"
url_photo_speaker="https://pe.tedcdn.com/images/ted/a3db33f4657a4b3680edde1f3fb8adeafd07aaf5_254x191.jpg"
url_photo_talk="https://s3.amazonaws.com/talkstar-photos/uploads/eacc05c8-f878-43f3-bf78-a439303d18d5/SonaarLuthra_2019T-embed.jpg"
url_webpage="https://www.ted.com/talks/sonaar_luthra_we_need_to_track_the_world_s_water_like_we_track_the_weather"
video_type_name="TED Stage Talk"
-->