---
title: Why the "wrong side of the tracks" is usually the east side of cities
speaker: Stephen DeBerry
description: >-
 What do communities on the social, economic and environmental margins have in
 common? For one thing, they tend to be on the east sides of cities. In this short
 talk about a surprising insight, anthropologist and venture capitalist Stephen
 DeBerry explains how both environmental and man-made factors have led to
 disparity by design in cities from East Palo Alto, California to East Jerusalem
 and beyond -- and suggests some elegant solutions to fix it.
date: 2018-04-10
tags: ["cities","community","culture","economics","anthropology","history","humanity","inequality","infrastructure","pollution","social-change","society","urban-planning"]
slug: stephen_deberry_why_the_wrong_side_of_the_tracks_is_usually_the_east_side_of_cities
---

I came to talk about first principles and communities that I love — especially East Palo
Alto, California, which is full of amazing people. It's also a community that's oddly
separated by the 101 freeway that runs through Silicon Valley. On the west side of the
freeway in Palo Alto are the "haves," on just about any dimension you can think of:
education, income, access to water. On the east side of the freeway are the "have-nots."
And even if you don't know East Palo Alto, you might know the story of eastside disparity,
whether it's the separation of the railroad tracks in East Pittsburgh or the Grosse Pointe
Gate in East Detroit or East St. Louis, East Oakland, East Philly. Why is it that
communities on the social, economic and environmental margin tend to be on the east sides
of places? Turns out, it's the wind. If you look at the Earth from the North Pole, you'd
see that it rotates counterclockwise.

The impact of this is that the winds in the northern and the southern hemispheres blow in
the same direction as the rotation of the Earth — to the east. A way to think about this
is: imagine you're sitting around a campfire. You've got to seat 10 people, you've got to
keep everyone warm. The question is: Who sits with the smoky wind blowing in their face?
And the answer is: people with less power. This campfire dynamic is what's playing out in
cities, not just in the US, but all around the world: East London; the east side of Paris
is this way; East Jerusalem. Even down the street from where we're sitting right now, the
marginalized community is East Vancouver. I'm not the only one to notice this. I nerded on
this hard, for years. And I finally found a group of economic historians in the UK who
modeled industrial-era smokestack dispersion. And they came to the same conclusion
mathematically that I'd come to as an anthropologist, which is: wind and pollution are
driving marginalized communities to the east.

The dominant logic of the industrial era is about disparity. It's about haves and
have-nots, and that's become part of our culture. That's why you know exactly what I'm
talking about if I tell you someone's from the "wrong side of the tracks." That phrase
comes from the direction that wind would blow dirty train smoke — to the east, usually.
I'm not saying every single community in the east is on the margin, or every community on
the margin is in the east, but I'm trying to make a bigger point about disparity by
design. So if you find yourself talking about any cardinal direction of a freeway, a
river, some train tracks, you're talking about an eastside community. Now, the wind is
obviously a natural phenomenon. But the human design decisions that we make to separate
ourselves is not natural. Consider the fact that every eastside community in the United
States was built during the era of legal segregation.

We clearly weren't even trying to design for the benefit of everyone, so we ended up
dealing with issues like redlining. This is where the government literally created maps to
tell bankers where they shouldn't lend. These are some of those actual maps. And you'll
notice how the red tends to be clustered on the east sides of these cities. Those
financial design decisions became a self-fulfilling prophecy: no loans turned into low
property tax base and that bled into worse schools and a less well-prepared workforce, and
— lo and behold — lower incomes. It means that you can't qualify for a loan. Just a
vicious downward spiral. And that's just the case with lending. We've made similarly
sinister design decisions on any number of issues, from water infrastructure to where we
decide to place grocery stores versus liquor stores, or even for whom and how we design
and fund technology products. Collectively, this list of harms is the artifact of our more
primitive selves.

I don't think this is how we'd want to be remembered, but this is basically what we've
been doing to eastside communities for the last century. The good news is, it doesn't have
to be this way. We got ourselves into this eastside dilemma through bad design, and so we
can get out of it with good design. And I believe the first principle of good design is
actually really simple: we have to start with the commitment to design for the benefit of
everyone. So, remember the campfire metaphor. If we want to benefit everyone, maybe we
just sit in a horseshoe, so nobody gets the smoke in their face. I've got to make a note to
the gentrifiers, because the point of this image is not to say you get to roll into
eastside communities and just move people out of the way, because you don't.

But the point is, if you start with this first principle of benefiting everyone, then
elegant solutions may become more obvious than you assume. What are the elegant solutions
to close this gap between Palo Alto and East Palo Alto in Silicon Valley? I've got to like
the odds of starting with EPA [East Palo Alto]. It's in the middle of Silicon Valley, the
epicenter of innovation and wealth creation. If we can solve this problem anywhere, it
ought to be here. And if we can solve the problems for EPA, we could apply those solutions
to other eastside communities. If you think about it, it's actually a massive investment
opportunity and an opportunity to drive policy change and philanthropy. But at the core,
it's this fundamental design principle, this choice of whether we're going to decide to
take care of everyone. And it's a choice we can make, loved ones. We've got the capital.
We've got technology on our side, and it keeps getting better.

We've got some of the best entrepreneurs in the world in this building and in these
communities right now. But the fundamental question is: What are we designing for? More
haves and have-nots? More disparity? Or parity, the choice to come together. Because the
reality is, this is not the industrial era. We don't live in the era of legal segregation.
So the punchline is, there is no wrong side of the tracks. And all I'm saying is, we
should design our economy and our communities with that in mind. Thank you.

<!--
ad_duration=3.33
comment_count=47
event="TED2018"
external_start_time=0
has_talk_citation=1
intro_duration=11.82
is_subtitle_required="False"
is_talk_featured="True"
language="en"
language_swap="False"
native_language="en"
number_of_related_talks=6
number_of_speakers=1
number_of_subtitled_videos=19
number_of_tags=13
number_of_talk_download_languages=19
number_of_talk_more_resources=0
number_of_talk_recommendations=1
number_of_talks_take_actions=2
post_ad_duration=0.83
published_timestamp="2018-08-21 14:50:21"
recording_date="2018-04-10"
speaker_description="Anthropologist, venture capitalist"
speaker_is_published=1
speaker_name="Stephen DeBerry"
talk_more_resources=[]
talk_name="Why the \"wrong side of the tracks\" is usually the east side of cities"
talk_recommendations_blurb="More resources curated by Stephen DeBerry"
talks_tags=["cities","community","culture","economics","anthropology","history","humanity","inequality","infrastructure","pollution","social-change","society","urban-planning"]
url_audio="https://download.ted.com/talks/StephenDeBerry_2018U.mp3?apikey=acme-roadrunner"
url_photo_speaker="https://pe.tedcdn.com/images/ted/eec7525fb3dee3725e6ca9facdd09696a2f92648_254x191.jpg"
url_photo_talk="https://s3.amazonaws.com/talkstar-photos/uploads/0a137541-aaa3-4395-be69-2c22b36e3a96/StephenDeBerry_2018U-embed.jpg"
url_webpage="https://www.ted.com/talks/stephen_deberry_why_the_wrong_side_of_the_tracks_is_usually_the_east_side_of_cities"
video_type_name="TED Stage Talk"
-->