---
title: The surprising decline in violence
speaker: Steven Pinker
description: >-
 Steven Pinker charts the decline of violence from Biblical times to the present,
 and argues that, though it may seem illogical and even obscene, given Iraq and
 Darfur, we are living in the most peaceful time in our species' existence.
date: 2007-03-03
tags: ["business","culture","global-issues","media","sociology","violence","war"]
slug: steven_pinker_the_surprising_decline_in_violence
---

Images like this, from the Auschwitz concentration camp, have been seared into our
consciousness during the 20th century and have given us a new understanding of who we are,
where we've come from and the times we live in. During the 20th century, we witnessed the
atrocities of Stalin, Hitler, Mao, Pol Pot, Rwanda and other genocides, and even though
the 21st century is only seven years old, we have already witnessed an ongoing genocide in
Darfur and the daily horrors of Iraq. This has led to a common understanding of our
situation, namely, that modernity has brought us terrible violence, and perhaps that
native peoples lived in a state of harmony that we have departed from, to our peril. Here
is an example from an op-ed on Thanksgiving, in the "Boston Globe" a couple of years ago,
where the writer wrote, "The Indian life was a difficult one, but there were no employment
problems, community harmony was strong, substance abuse unknown, crime nearly
nonexistent.

What warfare there was between tribes was largely ritualistic and seldom resulted in
indiscriminate or wholesale slaughter." Now you're all familiar with this treacle. We
teach it to our children. We hear it on television and in storybooks. Now, the original
title of this session was, "Everything You Know is Wrong," and I'm going to present
evidence that this particular part of our common understanding is wrong, that, in fact,
our ancestors were far more violent than we are, that violence has been in decline for
long stretches of time, and that today, we are probably living in the most peaceful time
in our species's existence. Now in the decade of Darfur and Iraq, a statement like that
might seem somewhere between hallucinatory and obscene, but I'm going to try to convince
you that that is the correct picture. The decline of violence is a fractal phenomenon. You
can see it over millennia, over centuries, over decades and over years, although there
seems to have been a tipping point at the onset of the Age of Reason in the 16th
century.

One sees it all over the world, although not homogeneously. It's especially evident in the
West, beginning with England and Holland around the time of the Enlightenment. Let me take
you on a journey of several powers of 10 — from the millennium scale to the year scale —
to try to persuade you of this. Until 10,000 years ago, all humans lived as
hunter-gatherers, without permanent settlements or government. And this is the state
that's commonly thought to be one of primordial harmony. But the archaeologist Lawrence
Keeley, looking at casualty rates among contemporary hunter-gatherers, which is our best
source of evidence about this way of life, has shown a rather different conclusion. Here is
a graph that he put together, showing the percentage of male deaths due to warfare in a
number of foraging or hunting and gathering societies. The red bars correspond to the
likelihood that a man will die at the hands of another man, as opposed to passing away of
natural causes, in a variety of foraging societies in the New Guinea highlands and the
Amazon rain forest.

And they range from a rate of almost a 60 percent chance that a man will die at the hands
of another man to, in the case of the Gebusi, only a 15 percent chance. The tiny little
blue bar in the lower left-hand corner plots the corresponding statistic from the United
States and Europe in the 20th century, and it includes all the deaths of both World Wars.
If the death rate in tribal warfare had prevailed during the 20th century, there would
have been two billion deaths rather than 100 million. Also on the millennium scale, we can
look at the way of life of early civilizations, such as the ones described in the Bible.
And in this supposed source of our moral values, one can read descriptions of what was
expected in warfare, such as the following, from Numbers 31: "And they warred against the
Midianites as the Lord commanded Moses, and they slew all the males. And Moses said unto
them, 'Have you saved all the women alive?

Now, therefore, kill every male among the little ones and kill every woman that hath known
man by lying with him, but all the women children that have not known a man by lying with
him, keep alive for yourselves.'" In other words: kill the men, kill the children. If you
see any virgins, then you can keep them alive so that you can rape them. And you can find
four or five passages in the Bible of this ilk. Also in the Bible, one sees that the death
penalty was the accepted punishment for crimes such as homosexuality, adultery, blasphemy,
idolatry, talking back to your parents —

and picking up sticks on the Sabbath. Well, let's click the zoom lens down one order of
magnitude and look at the century scale. Now, although we don't have statistics for
warfare throughout the Middle Ages to modern times, we know just from conventional history
that the evidence was under our nose all along that there has been a reduction in socially
sanctioned forms of violence. For example, any social history will reveal that mutilation
and torture were routine forms of criminal punishment. The kind of infraction today that
would give you a fine, in those days, would result in your tongue being cut out, your ears
being cut off, you being blinded, a hand being chopped off and so on. There were numerous
ingenious forms of sadistic capital punishment: burning at the stake, disemboweling,
breaking on the wheel, being pulled apart by horses and so on. The death penalty was a
sanction for a long list of nonviolent crimes: criticizing the king, stealing a loaf of
bread.

Slavery, of course, was the preferred labor-saving device, and cruelty was a popular form
of entertainment. Perhaps the most vivid example was the practice of cat burning, in which
a cat was hoisted on a stage and lowered in a sling into a fire, and the spectators
shrieked in laughter as the cat, howling in pain, was burned to death. What about
one-on-one murder? Well, there, there are good statistics, because many municipalities
recorded the cause of death. The criminologist Manuel Eisner scoured all of the historical
records across Europe for homicide rates in any village, hamlet, town, county that he
could find, and then he supplemented them with national data when nations started keeping
statistics. He plotted on a logarithmic scale, going from 100 deaths per 100,000 people
per year, which was approximately the rate of homicide in the Middle Ages, and the figure
plummets down to less than one homicide per 100,000 people per year in seven or eight
European countries.

Then, there is a slight uptick in the 1960s. The people who said that rock and roll would
lead to the decline of moral values actually had a grain of truth to that. But there was a
decline from at least two orders of magnitude in homicide from the Middle Ages to the
present, and the elbow occurred in the early 16th century. Let's click down now to the
decade scale. According to nongovernmental organizations that keep such statistics, since
1945, in Europe and the Americas, there has been a steep decline in interstate wars, in
deadly ethnic riots or pogroms and in military coups, even in South America. Worldwide,
there's been a steep decline in deaths in interstate wars. The yellow bars here show the
number of deaths per war per year from 1950 to the present. And, as you can see, the death
rate goes down from 65,000 deaths per conflict per year in the 1950s to less than 2,000
deaths per conflict per year in this decade, as horrific as it is.

Even in the year scale, one can see a decline of violence. Since the end of the Cold War,
there have been fewer civil wars, fewer genocides — indeed, a 90 percent reduction since
post-World War II highs — and even a reversal of the 1960s uptick in homicide and violent
crime. This is from the FBI uniform crime statistics. You can see that there's a fairly
low rate of violence in the '50s and the '60s, then it soared upward for several decades
and began a precipitous decline, starting in the 1990s, so that it went back to the level
that was last enjoyed in 1960. President Clinton, if you're here: thank
you.

So the question is: Why are so many people so wrong about something so important? I think
there are a number of reasons. One of them is we have better reporting. The Associated
Press is a better chronicler of wars over the surface of the earth than 16th-century monks
were.

There's a cognitive illusion. We cognitive psychologists know that the easier it is to
recall specific instances of something, the higher the probability that you assign to it.
Things that we read about in the paper with gory footage burn into memory more than
reports of a lot more people dying in their beds of old age. There are dynamics in the
opinion and advocacy markets; no one ever attracted advocates and donors by saying,
"Things just seem to be getting better and better."

There's guilt about our treatment of native peoples in modern intellectual life, and an
unwillingness to acknowledge there could be anything good about Western culture. And, of
course, our change in standards can outpace the change in behavior. One of the reasons
violence went down is that people got sick of the carnage and cruelty in their time.
That's a process that seems to be continuing, but if it outstrips behavior by the
standards of the day, things always look more barbaric than they would have been by
historic standards. So today, we get exercised — and rightly so — if a handful of
murderers get executed by lethal injection in Texas after a 15-year appeal process. We
don't consider that a couple of hundred years ago, they may have been burned at the stake
for criticizing the king after a trial that lasted 10 minutes, and indeed, that that would
have been repeated over and over again.

Today, we look at capital punishment as evidence of how low our behavior can sink, rather
than how high our standards have risen. Well, why has violence declined? No one really
knows, but I have read four explanations, all of which, I think, have some grain of
plausibility. The first is: maybe Thomas Hobbes got it right. He was the one who said that
life in a state of nature was "solitary, poor, nasty, brutish and short."

Not because, he argued, humans have some primordial thirst for blood or aggressive
instinct or territorial imperative, but because of the logic of anarchy. In a state of
anarchy, there's a constant temptation to invade your neighbors preemptively, before they
invade you. More recently, Thomas Schelling gives the analogy of a homeowner who hears a
rustling in the basement. Being a good American, he has a pistol in the nightstand, pulls
out his gun, walks down the stairs. And what does he see but a burglar with a gun in his
hand? Now, each one of them is thinking, "I don't really want to kill that guy, but he's
about to kill me. Maybe I had better shoot him before he shoots me, especially since, even
if he doesn't want to kill me, he's probably worrying right now that I might kill him
before he kills me." And so on. Hunter-gatherer peoples explicitly go through this train
of thought and will often raid their neighbors out of fear of being raided first. Now, one
way of dealing with this problem is by deterrence.

You don't strike first, but you have a publicly announced policy that you will retaliate
savagely if you are invaded. The only thing is that it's liable to having its bluff
called, and therefore can only work if it's credible. To make it credible, you must avenge
all insults and settle all scores, which leads to the cycles of bloody vendetta. Life
becomes an episode of "The Sopranos." Hobbes's solution, "Leviathan," was that if
authority for the legitimate use of violence was vested in a single democratic agency — a
leviathan — then such a state can reduce the temptation of attack, because any kind of
aggression will be punished, leaving its profitability zero. That would remove the
temptation to invade preemptively out of fear of them attacking you first. It removes the
need for a hair trigger for retaliation to make your deterrent threat credible, and
therefore, it would lead to a state of peace.

Eisner — the man who plotted the homicide rates that you failed to see in the earlier
slide — argued that the timing of the decline of homicide in Europe coincided with the
rise of centralized states. So that's a bit of a support for the leviathan theory. Also
supporting it is the fact that we today see eruptions of violence in zones of anarchy, in
failed states, collapsed empires, frontier regions, mafias, street gangs and so on. The
second explanation is that in many times and places, there is a widespread sentiment that
life is cheap. In earlier times, when suffering and early death were common in one's own
life, one has fewer compunctions about inflicting them on others. And as technology and
economic efficiency make life longer and more pleasant, one puts a higher value on life in
general. This was an argument from the political scientist James Payne. A third explanation
invokes the concept of a nonzero-sum game, and was worked out in the book "Nonzero" by the
journalist Robert Wright.

Wright points out that, in certain circumstances, cooperation or nonviolence can benefit
both parties in an interaction, such as gains in trade when two parties trade their
surpluses and both come out ahead, or when two parties lay down their arms and split the
so-called peace dividend that results in them not having to fight the whole time. Wright
argues that technology has increased the number of positive-sum games that humans tend to
be embroiled in, by allowing the trade of goods, services and ideas over longer distances
and among larger groups of people. The result is that other people become more valuable
alive than dead, and violence declines for selfish reasons. As Wright put it, "Among the
many reasons that I think that we should not bomb the Japanese is that they built my
minivan."

The fourth explanation is captured in the title of a book called "The Expanding Circle,"
by the philosopher Peter Singer, who argues that evolution bequeathed humans with a sense
of empathy, an ability to treat other people's interests as comparable to one's own.
Unfortunately, by default, we apply it only to a very narrow circle of friends and family.
People outside that circle are treated as subhuman and can be exploited with impunity.
But, over history, the circle has expanded. One can see, in historical record, it
expanding from the village, to the clan, to the tribe, to the nation, to other races, to
both sexes and, in Singer's own arguments, something that we should extend to other
sentient species. So the question is: If this has happened, what has powered that
expansion? And there are a number of possibilities, such as increasing circles of
reciprocity in the sense that Robert Wright argues for.

The logic of the Golden Rule — the more you think about and interact with other people,
the more you realize that it is untenable to privilege your interests over theirs, at
least not if you want them to listen to you. You can't say that my interests are special
compared to yours any more than you can say the particular spot that I'm standing on is a
unique part of the universe because I happen to be standing on it that very minute. It may
also be powered by cosmopolitanism, by histories and journalism and memoirs and realistic
fiction and travel and literacy, which allows you to project yourself into the lives of
other people that formerly you may have treated as subhuman, and also to realize the
accidental contingency of your own station in life, the sense that "There but for fortune
go I."Whatever its causes, the decline of violence, I think, has profound implications. It
should force us to ask not just, "Why is there war?" but also, "Why is there peace?" Not
just, "What are we doing wrong?" but also, "What have we been doing right?" Because we
have been doing something right, and it sure would be good to find out what it
is.

Thank you very much.

Chris Anderson: I loved that talk. I think a lot of people here in the room would say that
that expansion you were talking about, that Peter Singer talks about, is also driven just
by technology, by greater visibility of the other and the sense that the world is
therefore getting smaller. I mean, is that also a grain of truth? Steven Pinker: Very much.
It would fit both in Wright's theory, that it allows us to enjoy the benefits of
cooperation over larger and larger circles. But also, I think it helps us imagine what
it's like to be someone else. I think when you read of these horrific tortures that were
common in the Middle Ages, you think, "How could they possibly have done it, how could
they not have empathized with the person that they're disemboweling?" But clearly, as far
as they're concerned, this is just an alien being that does not have feelings akin to
their own. Anything, I think, that makes it easier to imagine trading places with someone
else means that it increases your moral consideration to that other person. CA: I'd love
every news media owner to hear that talk at some point, it's so important. CA: Thank
you.

SP: My pleasure.

<!--
ad_duration=3.33
event="TED2007"
external_start_time=0
has_talk_citation=0
intro_duration=11.82
is_subtitle_required="False"
is_talk_featured="True"
language="en"
language_swap="False"
native_language="en"
number_of_related_talks=6
number_of_speakers=1
number_of_subtitled_videos=33
number_of_tags=7
number_of_talk_download_languages=33
number_of_talk_more_resources=1
number_of_talk_recommendations=0
number_of_talks_take_actions=0
post_ad_duration=0.83
published_timestamp="2007-09-10 10:55:00"
recording_date="2007-03-03"
speaker_description="Psychologist"
speaker_is_published=1
speaker_name="Steven Pinker"
talk_name="The surprising decline in violence"
talks_tags=["business","culture","global-issues","media","sociology","violence","war"]
talks_take_action=[]
url_audio="https://download.ted.com/talks/StevenPinker_2007.mp3?apikey=acme-roadrunner"
url_photo_speaker="https://pe.tedcdn.com/images/ted/1787fde4c8ec64c797a72a53864e8a420d8b35b3_254x191.jpg"
url_photo_talk="https://pe.tedcdn.com/images/ted/2cc6d3a7f29dff9bb21d734f462bb07e8457a2ca_1600x1200.jpg"
url_webpage="https://www.ted.com/talks/steven_pinker_the_surprising_decline_in_violence"
video_type_name="TED Stage Talk"
-->