---
title: This ancient rock is changing our theory on the origin of life
speaker: Tara Djokic
description: >-
 Exactly when and where did life on Earth begin? Scientists have long thought that
 it emerged three billion years ago in the ocean -- until astrobiologist Tara
 Djokic and her team made an unexpected discovery in the western Australian
 desert. Learn how an ancient rock found near a hot volcanic pool is shifting our
 understanding of the origin-of-life puzzle.
date: 2019-05-23
tags: ["science","evolution","human-origins","geology","astrobiology","biodiversity","nature","discovery","tedx","environment","life"]
slug: tara_djokic_this_ancient_rock_is_changing_our_theory_on_the_origin_of_life
---

The Earth is 4.6 billion years old, but a human lifetime often lasts for less than 100
years. So why care about the history of our planet when the distant past seems so
inconsequential to everyday life? You see, as far as we can tell, Earth is the only planet
in our solar system known to have sparked life, and the only system able to provide life
support for human beings. So why Earth? We know Earth is unique for having plate tectonics,
liquid water on its surface and an oxygen-rich atmosphere. But this has not always been
the case, and we know this because ancient rocks have recorded the pivotal moments in
Earth's planetary evolution. And one of the best places to observe those ancient rocks is
in the Pilbara of Western Australia. The rocks here are 3.5 billion years old, and they
contain some of the oldest evidence for life on the planet. Now, often when we think of
early life, we might imagine a stegosaurus or maybe a fish crawling onto
land.

But the early life that I'm talking about is simple microscopic life, like bacteria. And
their fossils are often preserved as layered rock structures, called stromatolites. This
simple form of life is almost all we see in the fossil record for the first three billion
years of life on Earth. Our species can only be traced back in the fossil record to a few
hundred thousand years ago. We know from the fossil record, bacteria life had grabbed a
strong foothold by about 3.5 to four billion years ago. The rocks older than this have
been either destroyed or highly deformed through plate tectonics. So what remains a
missing piece of the puzzle is exactly when and how life on Earth began. Here again is
that ancient volcanic landscape in the Pilbara. Little did I know that our research here
would provide another clue to that origin-of-life puzzle. It was on my first field trip
here, toward the end of a full, long week mapping project, that I came across something
rather special.

Now, what probably looks like a bunch of wrinkly old rocks are actually stromatolites. And
at the center of this mound was a small, peculiar rock about the size of a child's hand.
It took six months before we inspected this rock under a microscope, when one of my
mentors at the time, Malcolm Walter, suggested the rock resembled geyserite. Geyserite is
a rock type that only forms in and around the edges of hot spring pools. Now, in order for
you to understand the significance of geyserite, I need to take you back a couple of
centuries. In 1871, in a letter to his friend Joseph Hooker, Charles Darwin suggested:
"What if life started in some warm little pond with all sort of chemicals still ready to
undergo more complex changes?"Well, we know of warm little ponds. We call them "hot
springs." In these environments, you have hot water dissolving minerals from the
underlying rocks. This solution mixes with organic compounds and results in a kind of
chemical factory, which researchers have shown can manufacture simple cellular structures
that are the first steps toward life. But 100 years after Darwin's letter, deep-sea
hydrothermal vents, or hot vents, were discovered in the ocean.

And these are also chemical factories. This one is located along the Tonga volcanic arc,
1,100 meters below sea level in the Pacific Ocean. The black smoke that you see billowing
out of these chimneylike structures is also mineral-rich fluid, which is being fed off by
bacteria. And since the discovery of these deep-sea vents, the favored scenario for an
origin of life has been in the ocean. And this is for good reason: deep-sea vents are
well-known in the ancient rock record, and it's thought that the early Earth had a global
ocean and very little land surface. So the probability that deep-sea vents were abundant
on the very early Earth fits well with an origin of life in the ocean. However ... our
research in the Pilbara provides and supports an alternative perspective. After three
years, finally, we were able to show that, in fact, our little rock was geyserite. So this
conclusion suggested not only did hot springs exist in our 3.5 billion-year-old volcano in
the Pilbara, but it pushed back evidence for life living on land in hot springs in the
geological record of Earth by three billion years.

And so, from a geological perspective, Darwin's warm little pond is a reasonable
origin-of-life candidate. Of course, it's still debatable how life began on Earth, and it
probably always will be. But it is clear that it's flourished; it has diversified, and it
has become ever more complex. Eventually, it reached the age of the human, a species that
has begun to question its own existence and the existence of life elsewhere: Is there a
cosmic community waiting to connect with us, or are we all there is? A clue to this puzzle
again comes from the ancient rock record. At about 2.5 billion years ago, there is
evidence that bacteria had begun to produce oxygen, kind of like plants do today.
Geologists refer to the period that followed as the Great Oxidation Event. It is implied
from rocks called banded iron formations, many of which can be observed as
hundreds-of-meter-thick packages of rock which are exposed in gorges that carve their way
through the Karijini National Park in Western Australia.

The arrival of free oxygen allowed two major changes to occur on our planet. First, it
allowed complex life to evolve. You see, life needs oxygen to get big and complex. And it
produced the ozone layer, which protects modern life from the harmful effects of the sun's
UVB radiation. So in an ironic twist, microbial life made way for complex life, and in
essence, relinquished its three-billion-year reign over the planet. Today, we humans dig
up fossilized complex life and burn it for fuel. This practice pumps vast amounts of
carbon dioxide into the atmosphere, and like our microbial predecessors, we have begun to
make substantial changes to our planet. And the effects of those are encompassed by global
warming. Unfortunately, the ironic twist here could see the demise of humanity. And so
maybe the reason we aren't connecting with life elsewhere, intelligent life elsewhere, is
that once it evolves, it extinguishes itself quickly. If the rocks could talk, I suspect
they might say this: life on Earth is precious.

It is the product of four or so billion years of a delicate and complex co-evolution
between life and Earth, of which humans only represent the very last speck of time. You
can use this information as a guide or a forecast â€” or an explanation as to why it seems
so lonely in this part of the galaxy. But use it to gain some perspective about the legacy
that you want to leave behind on the planet that you call home. Thank you.

<!--
ad_duration=3.33
comment_count=71
event="TEDxSydney"
external_start_time=0
has_talk_citation=1
intro_duration=11.82
is_subtitle_required="False"
is_talk_featured="True"
language="en"
language_swap="False"
native_language="en"
number_of_related_talks=6
number_of_speakers=1
number_of_subtitled_videos=19
number_of_tags=11
number_of_talk_download_languages=19
number_of_talk_more_resources=0
number_of_talk_recommendations=1
number_of_talks_take_actions=2
post_ad_duration=0.83
published_timestamp="2019-10-07 14:49:07"
recording_date="2019-05-23"
speaker_description="Astrobiologist"
speaker_is_published=1
speaker_name="Tara Djokic"
talk_more_resources=[]
talk_name="This ancient rock is changing our theory on the origin of life"
talk_recommendations_blurb="More resources curated by Tara Djokic"
talks_tags=["science","evolution","human-origins","geology","astrobiology","biodiversity","nature","discovery","tedx","environment","life"]
url_audio="https://download.ted.com/talks/TaraDjokic_2019X.mp3?apikey=acme-roadrunner"
url_photo_speaker="https://pe.tedcdn.com/images/ted/d9541304dcbf1d58c3795696279559f1c03153bc_254x191.jpg"
url_photo_talk="https://s3.amazonaws.com/talkstar-photos/uploads/275cb11c-4716-4114-bdd5-fc6214302d73/TaraDjokic_2019X-embed.jpg"
url_webpage="https://www.ted.com/talks/tara_djokic_this_ancient_rock_is_changing_our_theory_on_the_origin_of_life"
video_type_name="TEDx Talk"
-->