---
title: 4 ways to build a human company in the age of machines
speaker: Tim Leberecht
description: >-
 In the face of artificial intelligence and machine learning, we need a new
 radical humanism, says Tim Leberecht. For the self-described "business romantic,"
 this means designing organizations and workplaces that celebrate authenticity
 instead of efficiency and questions instead of answers. Leberecht proposes four
 (admittedly subjective) principles for building beautiful organizations.
date: 2016-06-28
tags: ["business","beauty","collaboration","goalsetting","innovation","humanity","leadership","motivation","work"]
slug: tim_leberecht_4_ways_to_build_a_human_company_in_the_age_of_machines
---

Half of the human workforce is expected to be replaced by software and robots in the next
20 years. And many corporate leaders welcome that as a chance to increase profits.
Machines are more efficient; humans are complicated and difficult to manage. Well, I want
our organizations to remain human. In fact, I want them to become beautiful. Because as
machines take our jobs and do them more efficiently, soon the only work left for us humans
will be the kind of work that must be done beautifully rather than efficiently. To maintain
our humanity in the this second Machine Age, we may have no other choice than to create
beauty. Beauty is an elusive concept. For the writer Stendhal it was the promise of
happiness. For me it's a goal by Lionel Messi.

So bear with me as I am proposing four admittedly very subjective principles that you can
use to build a beautiful organization. First: do the unnecessary.[Do the Unnecessary]A few
months ago, Hamdi Ulukaya, the CEO and founder of the yogurt company Chobani, made
headlines when he decided to grant stock to all of his 2,000 employees. Some called it a
PR stunt, others — a genuine act of giving back. But there is something else that was
remarkable about it. It came completely out of the blue. There had been no market or
stakeholder pressure, and employees were so surprised that they burst into tears when they
heard the news. Actions like Ulukaya's are beautiful because they catch us off guard. They
create something out of nothing because they're completely unnecessary. I once worked at a
company that was the result of a merger of a large IT outsourcing firm and a small design
firm. We were merging 9,000 software engineers with 1,000 creative types.

And to unify these immensely different cultures, we were going to launch a third, new
brand. And the new brand color was going to be orange. And as we were going through the
budget for the rollouts, we decided last minute to cut the purchase of 10,000 orange
balloons, which we had meant to distribute to all staff worldwide. They just seemed
unnecessary and cute in the end. I didn't know back then that our decision marked the
beginning of the end — that these two organizations would never become one. And sure
enough, the merger eventually failed. Now, was it because there weren't any orange
balloons? No, of course not. But the kill-the-orange-balloons mentality permeated
everything else. You might not always realize it, but when you cut the unnecessary, you
cut everything. Leading with beauty means rising above what is merely necessary. So do not
kill your orange balloons. The second principle: create intimacy.[Create Intimacy]Studies
show that how we feel about our workplace very much depends on the relationships with our
coworkers.

And what are relationships other than a string of microinteractions? There are hundreds of
these every day in our organizations that have the potential to distinguish a good life
from a beautiful one. The marriage researcher John Gottman says that the secret of a
healthy relationship is not the great gesture or the lofty promise, it's small moments of
attachment. In other words, intimacy. In our networked organizations, we tout the strength
of weak ties but we underestimate the strength of strong ones. We forget the words of the
writer Richard Bach who once said, "Intimacy — not connectedness — intimacy is the
opposite of loneliness."So how do we design for organizational intimacy? The humanitarian
organization CARE wanted to launch a campaign on gender equality in villages in northern
India. But it realized quickly that it had to have this conversation first with its own
staff. So it invited all 36 team members and their partners to one of the Khajuraho
Temples, known for their famous erotic sculptures.

And there they openly discussed their personal relationships — their own experiences of
gender equality with the coworkers and the partners. It was eye-opening for the
participants. Not only did it allow them to relate to the communities they serve, it also
broke down invisible barriers and created a lasting bond amongst themselves. Not a single
team member quit in the next four years. So this is how you create intimacy. No masks ...
or lots of masks.

When Danone, the food company, wanted to translate its new company manifesto into product
initiatives, it gathered the management team and 100 employees from across different
departments, seniority levels and regions for a three-day strategy retreat. And it asked
everybody to wear costumes for the entire meeting: wigs, crazy hats, feather boas, huge
glasses and so on. And they left with concrete outcomes and full of enthusiasm. And when I
asked the woman who had designed this experience why it worked, she simply said, "Never
underestimate the power of a ridiculous wig."

Because wigs erase hierarchy, and hierarchy kills intimacy — both ways, for the CEO and
the intern. Wigs allow us to use the disguise of the false to show something true about
ourselves. And that's not easy in our everyday work lives, because the relationship with
our organizations is often like that of a married couple that has grown apart, suffered
betrayals and disappointments, and is now desperate to be beautiful for one another once
again. And for either of us the first step towards beauty involves a huge risk. The risk
to be ugly.[Be Ugly]So many organizations these days are keen on designing beautiful
workplaces that look like anything but work: vacation resorts, coffee shops, playgrounds
or college campuses —

Based on the promises of positive psychology, we speak of play and gamification, and one
start-up even says that when someone gets fired, they have graduated.

That kind of beautiful language only goes "skin deep, but ugly cuts clean to the bone," as
the writer Dorothy Parker once put it. To be authentic is to be ugly. It doesn't mean that
you can't have fun or must give in to the vulgar or cynical, but it does mean that you
speak the actual ugly truth. Like this manufacturer that wanted to transform one of its
struggling business units. It identified, named and pinned on large boards all the issues
— and there were hundreds of them — that had become obstacles to better performance. They
put them on boards, moved them all into one room, which they called "the ugly room." The
ugly became visible for everyone to see — it was celebrated. And the ugly room served as a
mix of mirror exhibition and operating room — a biopsy on the living flesh to cut out all
the bureaucracy. The ugliest part of our body is our brain. Literally and neurologically.
Our brain renders ugly what is unfamiliar ...

modern art, atonal music, jazz, maybe — VR goggles for that matter — strange objects,
sounds and people. But we've all been ugly once. We were a weird-looking baby, a new kid
on the block, a foreigner. And we will be ugly again when we don't belong. The Center for
Political Beauty, an activist collective in Berlin, recently staged an extreme artistic
intervention. With the permission of relatives, it exhumed the corpses of refugees who had
drowned at Europe's borders, transported them all the way to Berlin, and then reburied
them at the heart of the German capital. The idea was to allow them to reach their desired
destination, if only after their death. Such acts of beautification may not be pretty, but
they are much needed. Because things tend to get ugly when there's only one meaning, one
truth, only answers and no questions. Beautiful organizations keep asking questions. They
remain incomplete, which is the fourth and the last of the principles.[Remain
Incomplete]Recently I was in Paris, and a friend of mine took me to Nuit Debout, which
stands for "up all night," the self-organized protest movement that had formed in response
to the proposed labor laws in France.

Every night, hundreds gathered at the Place de la République. Every night they set up a
small, temporary village to deliberate their own vision of the French Republic. And at the
core of this adhocracy was a general assembly where anybody could speak using a specially
designed sign language. Like Occupy Wall Street and other protest movements, Nuit Debout
was born in the face of crisis. It was messy — full of controversies and contradictions.
But whether you agreed with the movement's goals or not, every gathering was a beautiful
lesson in raw humanity. And how fitting that Paris — the city of ideals, the city of
beauty — was it's stage. It reminds us that like great cities, the most beautiful
organizations are ideas worth fighting for — even and especially when their outcome is
uncertain. They are movements; they are always imperfect, never fully organized, so they
avoid ever becoming banal. They have something but we don't know what it
is.

They remain mysterious; we can't take our eyes off them. We find them beautiful. So to do
the unnecessary, to create intimacy, to be ugly, to remain incomplete — these are not only
the qualities of beautiful organizations, these are inherently human characteristics. And
these are also the qualities of what we call home. And as we disrupt, and are disrupted,
the least we can do is to ensure that we still feel at home in our organizations, and that
we use our organizations to create that feeling for others. Beauty can save the world when
we embrace these principles and design for them. In the face of artificial intelligence
and machine learning, we need a new radical humanism. We must acquire and promote a new
aesthetic and sentimental education. Because if we don't, we might end up feeling like
aliens in organizations and societies that are full of smart machines that have no
appreciation whatsoever for the unnecessary, the intimate, the incomplete and definitely
not for the ugly. Thank you.

<!--
ad_duration=3.33
comment_count=26
event="TEDSummit"
external_start_time=0
has_talk_citation=1
intro_duration=11.82
is_subtitle_required="False"
is_talk_featured="True"
language="en"
language_swap="False"
native_language="en"
number_of_related_talks=6
number_of_speakers=1
number_of_subtitled_videos=24
number_of_tags=9
number_of_talk_download_languages=24
number_of_talk_more_resources=0
number_of_talk_recommendations=1
number_of_talks_take_actions=0
post_ad_duration=0.83
published_timestamp="2016-11-03 15:05:34"
recording_date="2016-06-28"
speaker_description="Business romantic"
speaker_is_published=1
speaker_name="Tim Leberecht"
talk_more_resources=[]
talk_name="4 ways to build a human company in the age of machines"
talk_recommendations_blurb="These events, essays, books, movies and songs have inspired and challenged me to look for beauty where you'd least expect it."
talks_tags=["business","beauty","collaboration","goalsetting","innovation","humanity","leadership","motivation","work"]
talks_take_action=[]
url_audio="https://download.ted.com/talks/TimLeberecht_2016T.mp3?apikey=acme-roadrunner"
url_photo_speaker="https://pe.tedcdn.com/images/ted/11eb589dbd84fa08409b9b0dbf94fd38e69235c1_254x191.jpg"
url_photo_talk="https://s3.amazonaws.com/talkstar-photos/uploads/9d8a4b48-4de4-4338-8aba-e0d1c1321a44/TimLeberecht_2016S-embed.jpg"
url_webpage="https://www.ted.com/talks/tim_leberecht_4_ways_to_build_a_human_company_in_the_age_of_machines"
video_type_name="TED Stage Talk"
-->