---
title: Lessons from fungi on markets and economics
speaker: Toby Kiers
description: >-
 Resource inequality is one of our greatest challenges, but it's not unique to
 humans. Like us, mycorrhizal fungi that live in plant and tree roots strategically
 trade, steal and withhold resources, displaying remarkable parallels to humans in
 their capacity to be opportunistic (and sometimes ruthless) -- all in the absence
 of cognition. In a mind-blowing talk, evolutionary biologist Toby Kiers shares
 what fungi networks and relationships reveal about human economies, and what they
 can tell us about inequality.
date: 2019-09-24
tags: ["biology","evolution","plants","trees","fungi","markets","economics","business","inequality","botany"]
slug: toby_kiers_lessons_from_fungi_on_markets_and_economics
---

So I stand before you as an evolutionary biologist, a professor of evolutionary biology,
which sounds like a rather fancy title, if I may say so myself. And I'm going to talk
about two topics that aren't normally talked about together, and that's market economies
and fungi. Or is it fun-GUY, or, as we say in Europe now, fun-GEE? There's still no
consensus on how to say this word. So I want you to imagine a market economy that's 400
million years old, one that's so ubiquitous that it operates in almost every ecosystem of
the world, so huge that it can connect millions of traders simultaneously, and so
persistent that it survived mass extinctions. It's here, right now, under our feet. You
just can't see it. And unlike human economies that rely on cognition to make decisions,
traders in this market, they beg, borrow, steal, cheat, all in the absence of thought. So
hidden from our eyes, plant roots are colonized by a fungus called arbuscule
mycorrhizae.

Now the fungus forms these complex networks underground of fine filaments thinner than
even threads of cotton. So follow one of these fungi, and it connects multiple plants
simultaneously. You can think of it as an underground subway system, where each root is a
station, where resources are loaded and unloaded. And it's also very dense, so roughly the
length of many meters, even a kilometer, in a single gram of dirt. So that's the length of
10 football fields in just a thimbleful of soil. And it's everywhere. So if you passed
over a tree, a shrub, a vine, even a tiny weed, you passed over a mycorrhizal network.
Roughly 80 percent of all plant species are associated with these mycorrhizal fungi. So
what does a root covered in fungi have to do with our global economy? And why as an
evolutionary biologist have I spent the last 10 years of my life learning economic jargon?
Well, the first thing you need to understand is that trade deals made by plant and fungal
partners are surprisingly similar to those made by us, but perhaps even more
strategic.

You see, plant and fungal partners, they're not exchanging stocks and bonds, they're
exchanging essential resources, and for the fungus, that's sugars and fats. It gets all of
its carbon directly from the plant partner. So much carbon, so every year, roughly five
billion tons of carbon from plants go into this network underground. For the root, what
they need is phosphorus and nitrogen, so by exchanging their carbon they get access to all
of the nutrients collected by that fungal network. So to make the trade, the fungus
penetrates into the root cell of the host and forms a tiny structure called an arbuscule,
which is Latin for "little tree." Now, you can think of this as the physical stock
exchange of the trade market. So up until now, it seems very harmonious. Right? I scratch
your back, you scratch mine, both partners get what they need. But here is where we need
to pause and understand the power of evolution and natural selection.

You see, there's no room for amateur traders on this market. Making the right trade
strategy determines who lives and who dies. Now, I use the word strategy, but of course
plant and fungi, they don't have brains. They're making these exchanges in the absence of
anything that we would consider as thought. But, as scientists, we use behavioral terms
such as strategy to describe behaviors to certain conditions, actions and reactions that
are actually programmed into the DNA of the organism. So I started studying these trade
strategies when I was 19 years old and I was living in the tropical rainforests of Panama.
Now, everybody at the time was interested in this incredible diversity aboveground. And it
was hyperdiversity. These are tropical rainforests. But I was interested in the complexity
belowground. We knew that the networks existed, and we knew they were important, and I'm
going to say it again, by important I mean important, so the basis of all plant nutrition
for all the diversity that you do see aboveground.

But at the time, we didn't know how these networks worked. We didn't know how they
functioned. Why did only certain plants interact with certain fungi? So fast-forward to
when I started my own group, and we really began to play with this trade market. You see,
we would manipulate conditions. We would create a good trading partner by growing a plant
in the sun and a poor trading partner by growing it in the shade. We would then connect
these with a fungal network. And we found that the fungi were consistently good at
discriminating among good and bad trading partners. They would allocate more resources to
the host plant giving them more carbon. Now, we would run the reciprocal experiments where
we would inoculate a host plant with good and bad fungi, and they were also good at
discriminating between these trade partners. So what you have there is the perfect
conditions for a market to emerge.

It's a simple market, but it's a market nonetheless, where the better trading partner is
consistently favored. But is it a fair market? Now this is where you need to understand
that, like humans, plants and fungi are incredibly opportunistic. There's evidence that
the fungus, once it penetrates into the plant cell, it can actually hijack the plant's own
nutrient uptake system. It does this by suppressing the plant's own ability to take up
nutrients from the soil. So this creates a dependency of the plant on the fungus. It's a
false addiction, of sorts, whereby the plant has to feed the fungus just to get access to
the resources right around its own root. There's also evidence that the fungi are good at
inflating the price of nutrients. They do this by extracting the nutrients from the soil,
but then rather than trading them with the host, they hoard them in their network, so this
makes them unavailable to the plant and other competing fungi.

So basic economics, as resource availability goes down, the value goes up. The plant is
forced to pay more for the same amount of resources. But it's not all in favor of the
fungus. Plants can be extremely cunning as well. There are some orchids — and I always
think orchids somehow seem like the most devious of the plant species in the world — and
there are some orchids that just tap directly into the network and steal all their carbon.
So these orchids, they don't even make green leaves to photosynthesize. They're just
white. So rather than photosynthesizing, tap into the network, steal the carbon and give
nothing in return. Now I think it's fair to say that these types of parasites also flourish
in our human markets. So as we began to decode these strategies, we learned some lessons.
And the first one was that there's no altruism in this system. There's no trade favors. We
don't see strong evidence of the fungus helping dying or struggling plants unless it
directly benefits the fungus itself. Now I'm not saying if this is good or
bad.

Unlike humans, a fungus, of course, cannot judge its own morality. And as a biologist, I'm
not advocating for these types of ruthless neoliberal market dynamics enacted by the
fungi. But the trade system, it provides us with a benchmark to study what an economy
looks like when it's been shaped by natural selection for hundreds of millions of years in
the absence of morality, when strategies are just based on the gathering and processing of
information, uncontaminated by cognition: no jealousy, no spite, but no hope, no joy. So
we've made progress in decoding the most basic trade principles at this point, but as
scientists we always want to take it one step further, and we're interested in more
complex economic dilemmas. And specifically we're interested in the effects of
inequality. So inequality has really become a defining feature of today's economic
landscape. But the challenges of inequality are not unique to the human
world.

I think as humans we tend to think that everything's unique to us, but organisms in nature
must face relentless variation in their access to resources. How does a fungus that can
again be meters long change its trade strategy when it's exposed simultaneously to a rich
patch and a poor patch? And, more generally, how do organisms in nature use trade to their
advantage when they're faced with uncertainty in terms of their access to resources? Here's
where I have to let you in on a secret: studying trade underground is incredibly
difficult. You can't see where or when important trade deals take place. So our group
helped pioneer a method, a technology, whereby we could tag nutrients with nanoparticles,
fluorescing nanoparticles called quantum dots. What the quantum dots allow us to do is
actually light up the nutrients so we can visually track their movements across the fungal
network and into the host root.

So this allows us finally to see the unseen, so we can study how fungi bargain at a small
scale with their plant hosts. So to study inequality, we exposed a fungal network to these
varying concentrations of fluorescing phosphorus, mimicking patches of abundance and
scarcity across this artificial landscape. We then carefully quantified fungal trade. And
we found two things. The first thing we found was that inequality encouraged the fungus to
trade more. So I can use the word "encouraged" or "stimulated" or "forced," but the bottom
line is that compared to control conditions, inequality was associated with higher levels
of trade. This is important, because it suggests that evolving a trade partnership in
nature can help organisms cope with the uncertainty of accessing resources. Second, we
found that, exposed to inequality, the fungus would move resources from the rich patch of
the network, actively transport them to the poor side of the network.

Now, of course, we could see this because the patches were fluorescing in different
colors. So at first, this result was incredibly puzzling. Was it to help the poor side of
the network? No. We found that the fungus gained more by first moving the resources to
where demand was higher. Simply by changing where across the network the fungus was
trading, it could manipulate the value of those resources. Now this stimulated us to really
dig deeper into how information is shared. It suggests a high level of sophistication, or
at least a medium level of sophistication in an organism with no cognition. How is it that
a fungus can sense market conditions across its network and then make calculations of
where and when to trade? So we wanted to look about information and how it's shared across
this network, how the fungus integrates cues. So to do that, what you need to do is dive
deep in and get a higher resolution into the network itself. We began to study complex
flows inside the hyphal network.

So what you're looking at right now is a living fungal network with the cellular contents
moving across it. This is happening in real time, so you can see the time stamp up there.
So this is happening right now. This video isn't sped up. This is what is happening under
our feet right now. And there's a couple of things that I want you to notice. It speeds
up, it slows down, it switches directions. So we're working now with biophysicists to try
to dissect this complexity. How is the fungus using these complex flow patterns to share
and process information and make these trade decisions? Are fungi better at making trade
calculations than us? Now here's where we can potentially borrow models from nature. We're
increasingly reliant on computer algorithms to make us profitable trades in split-second
time scales. But computer algorithms and fungi, they both operate in similar, uncognitive
ways. The fungi just happens to be a living machine. What would happen if we compare and
compete the trading strategies of these two?

Who would win? The tiny capitalist that's been around since before and the fall of the
dinosaurs? My money is on the fungus. Thank you.

<!--
ad_duration=3.33
comment_count=8
event="TED@BCG Mumbai"
external_start_time=0
has_talk_citation=1
intro_duration=11.82
is_subtitle_required="False"
is_talk_featured="True"
language="en"
language_swap="False"
native_language="en"
number_of_related_talks=6
number_of_speakers=1
number_of_subtitled_videos=13
number_of_tags=10
number_of_talk_download_languages=13
number_of_talk_more_resources=0
number_of_talk_recommendations=1
number_of_talks_take_actions=1
post_ad_duration=0.83
published_timestamp="2019-10-30 15:00:45"
recording_date="2019-09-24"
speaker_description="Evolutionary biologist"
speaker_is_published=1
speaker_name="Toby Kiers"
talk_more_resources=[]
talk_name="Lessons from fungi on markets and economics"
talk_recommendations_blurb="More resources curated by Toby Kiers"
talks_tags=["biology","evolution","plants","trees","fungi","markets","economics","business","inequality","botany"]
url_audio="https://download.ted.com/talks/TobyKiers_2019S.mp3?apikey=acme-roadrunner"
url_photo_speaker="https://pe.tedcdn.com/images/ted/531ae62ab4411989cc1e6836c9a076da6b69d9da_254x191.jpg"
url_photo_talk="https://s3.amazonaws.com/talkstar-photos/uploads/c9c250c8-b33c-4171-a8c9-b996d2f438f1/TobyKiers_2019S-embed.jpg"
url_webpage="https://www.ted.com/talks/toby_kiers_lessons_from_fungi_on_markets_and_economics"
video_type_name="TED Institute Talk"
-->