---
title: What can save the rainforest? Your used cell phone
speaker: Topher White
description: >-
 The sounds of the rainforest include: the chirps of birds, the buzz of cicadas,
 the banter of gibbons. But in the background is the almost-always present sound
 of a chainsaw, from illegal loggers. Engineer Topher White shares a simple,
 scalable way to stop this brutal deforestation — that starts with your old cell
 phone.
date: 2014-09-24
tags: ["climate-change","environment","technology","trees"]
slug: topher_white_what_can_save_the_rainforest_your_used_cell_phone
---

(Rainforest noises)In the summer of 2011, as a tourist, I visited the rainforests of
Borneo for the very first time, and as you might imagine, it was the overwhelming sounds
of the forest that struck me the most. There's this constant cacophony of noise. Some
things actually do stick out. For example, this here is a big bird, a rhinoceros hornbill.
This buzzing is a cicada. This is a family of gibbons. It's actually singing to each other
over a great distance. The place where this was recorded was in fact a gibbon reserve,
which is why you can hear so many of them, but in fact the most important noise that was
coming out of the forest that time was one that I didn't notice, and in fact nobody there
had actually noticed it. So, as I said, this was a gibbon reserve. They spend most of their
time rehabilitating gibbons, but they also have to spend a lot of their time protecting
their area from illegal logging that takes place on the side.

And so if we take the sound of the forest and we actually turn down the gibbons, the
insects, and the rest, in the background, the entire time, in recordings you heard, was
the sound of a chainsaw at great distance. They had three full-time guards who were posted
around this sanctuary whose job was in fact to guard against illegal logging, and one day,
we went walking, again as tourists, out into the forest, and within five minutes' walk, we
stumbled upon somebody who was just sawing a tree down, five minutes' walk, a few hundred
meters from the ranger station. They hadn't been able to hear the chainsaws, because as
you heard, the forest is very, very loud. It struck me as quite unacceptable that in this
modern time, just a few hundred meters away from a ranger station in a sanctuary, that in
fact nobody could hear it when someone who has a chainsaw gets fired up. It sounds
impossible, but in fact, it was quite true. So how do we stop illegal logging?

It's really tempting, as an engineer, always to come up with a high-tech, super-crazy
high-tech solution, but in fact, you're in the rainforest. It has to be simple, it has to
be scalable, and so what we also noticed while were there was that everything we needed
was already there. We could build a system that would allow us to stop this using what's
already there. Who was there? What was already in the forest? Well, we had people. We had
this group there that was dedicated, three full-time guards, that was dedicated to go and
stop it, but they just needed to know what was happening out in the forest. The real
surprise, this is the big one, was that there was connectivity out in the forest. There
was cell phone service way out in the middle of nowhere. We're talking hundreds of
kilometers from the nearest road, there's certainly no electricity, but they had very good
cell phone service, these people in the towns were on Facebook all the time, they're
surfing the web on their phones, and this sort of got me thinking that in fact it would be
possible to use the sounds of the forest, pick up the sounds of chainsaws
programmatically, because people can't hear them, and send an alert.

But you have to have a device to go up in the trees. So if we can use some device to
listen to the sounds of the forest, connect to the cell phone network that's there, and
send an alert to people on the ground, perhaps we could have a solution to this issue for
them. But let's take a moment to talk about saving the rainforest, because it's something
that we've definitely all heard about forever. People in my generation have heard about
saving the rainforest since we were kids, and it seems that the message has never changed:
We've got to save the rainforest, it's super urgent, this many football fields have been
destroyed yesterday. and yet here we are today, about half of the rainforest remains, and
we have potentially more urgent problems like climate change. But in fact, this is the
little-known fact that I didn't realize at the time: Deforestation accounts for more
greenhouse gas than all of the world's planes, trains, cars, trucks and ships
combined.

It's the second highest contributor to climate change. Also, according to Interpol, as
much as 90 percent of the logging that takes place in the rainforest is illegal logging,
like the illegal logging that we saw. So if we can help people in the forest enforce the
rules that are there, then in fact we could eat heavily into this 17 percent and
potentially have a major impact in the short term. It might just be the cheapest, fastest
way to fight climate change. And so here's the system that we imagine. It looks super high
tech. The moment a sound of a chainsaw is heard in the forest, the device picks up the
sound of the chainsaw, it sends an alert through the standard GSM network that's already
there to a ranger in the field who can in fact show up in real time and stop the logging.
It's no more about going out and finding a tree that's been cut. It's not about seeing a
tree from a satellite in an area that's been clear cut, it's about real-time
intervention. So I said it was the cheapest and fastest way to do it, but in fact,
actually, as you saw, they weren't able to do it, so it may not be so cheap and
fast.

But if the devices in the trees were actually cell phones, it could be pretty cheap. Cell
phones are thrown away by the hundreds of millions every year, hundreds of millions in the
U.S. alone, not counting the rest of the world, which of course we should do, but in fact,
cell phones are great. They're full of sensors. They can listen to the sounds of the
forest. We do have to protect them. We have to put them in this box that you see here, and
we do have to power them. Powering them is one of the greater engineering challenges that
we had to deal with, because powering a cell phone under a tree canopy, any sort of solar
power under a tree canopy, was an as-yet-unsolved problem, and that's this unique solar
panel design that you see here, which in fact is built also from recycled byproducts of an
industrial process. These are strips that are cut down. So this is me putting it all
together in my parents' garage, actually. Thanks very much to them for allowing me to do
that.

As you can see, this is a device up in a tree. What you can see from here, perhaps, is
that they are pretty well obscured up in the tree canopy at a distance. That's important,
because although they are able to hear chainsaw noises up to a kilometer in the distance,
allowing them to cover about three square kilometers, if someone were to take them, it
would make the area unprotected. So does it actually work? Well, to test it, we took it
back to Indonesia, not the same place, but another place, to another gibbon reserve that
was threatened daily by illegal logging. On the very second day, it picked up illegal
chainsaw noises. We were able to get a real-time alert. I got an email on my phone.
Actually, we had just climbed the tree. Everyone had just gotten back down. All these guys
are smoking cigarettes, and then I get an email, and they all quiet down, and in fact you
can hear the chainsaw really, really faint in the background, but no one had noticed it 
until that moment.

And so then we took off to actually stop these loggers. I was pretty nervous. This is the
moment where we've actually arrived close to where the loggers are. This is the moment
where you can see where I'm actually regretting perhaps the entire endeavor. I'm not
really sure what's on the other side of this hill. That guy's much braver than I am. But
he went, so I had to go, walking up, and in fact, he made it over the hill, and
interrupted the loggers in the act. For them, it was such a surprise — they had never,
ever been interrupted before — that it was such an impressive event for them, that we've
heard from our partners they have not been back since. They were, in fact, great guys.
They showed us how the entire operation works, and what they really convinced us on the
spot was that if you can show up in real time and stop people, it's enough of a deterrent
they won't come back. So — Thank you.

Word of this spread, possibly because we told a lot of people, and in fact, then some
really amazing stuff started to happen. People from around the world started to send us
emails, phone calls. What we saw was that people throughout Asia, people throughout
Africa, people throughout South America, they told us that they could use it too, and
what's most important, what we'd found that we thought might be exceptional, in the forest
there was pretty good cell phone service. That was not exceptional, we were told, and that
particularly is on the periphery of the forests that are most under threat. And then
something really amazing happened, which was that people started sending us their own old
cell phones. So in fact what we have now is a system where we can use people on the
ground, people who are already there, who can both improve and use the existing
connectivity, and we're using old cell phones that are being sent to us by people from
around the world that want their phones to be doing something else in their afterlife, so
to speak.

And if the rest of the device can be completely recycled, then we believe it's an entirely
upcycled device. So again, this didn't come because of any sort of high-tech solution. It
just came from using what's already there, and I'm thoroughly convinced that if it's not
phones, that there's always going to be enough there that you can build similar solutions
that can be very effective in new contexts. Thank you very much.

<!--
ad_duration=3.33
comment_count=97
event="TEDxCERN"
external_start_time=0
intro_duration=11.82
is_subtitle_required="False"
is_talk_featured="True"
language="en"
language_swap="False"
native_language="en"
number_of_related_talks=6
number_of_speakers=1
number_of_subtitled_videos=31
number_of_tags=4
number_of_talk_download_languages=31
number_of_talk_more_resources=0
number_of_talk_recommendations=0
number_of_talks_take_actions=0
post_ad_duration=0.83
published_timestamp="2015-03-03 15:46:32"
recording_date="2014-09-24"
speaker_description="Conservation technologist"
speaker_is_published=1
speaker_name="Topher White"
talk_name="What can save the rainforest? Your used cell phone"
talks_tags=["climate-change","environment","technology","trees"]
url_audio="https://download.ted.com/talks/TopherWhite_2014X.mp3?apikey=acme-roadrunner"
url_photo_speaker="https://pe.tedcdn.com/images/ted/ddb0bae6f3d3bcdb51366648928a1d7bbfff73d0_254x191.jpg"
url_photo_talk="https://pe.tedcdn.com/images/ted/669b823fdebb68cb659363018b74c98be560e139_2880x1620.jpg"
url_webpage="https://www.ted.com/talks/topher_white_what_can_save_the_rainforest_your_used_cell_phone"
video_type_name="TEDx Talk"
-->