---
title: What a nun can teach a scientist about ecology
speaker: Victoria Gill
description: >-
 To save the achoque -- an exotic (and adorable) salamander found in a lake in
 northern Mexico -- scientists teamed up with an unexpected research partner: a
 group of nuns called the Sisters of the Immaculate Health. In this delightful
 talk, science journalist Victoria Gill shares the story of how this unusual
 collaboration saved the achoque from extinction -- and demonstrates how local and
 indigenous people could hold the secret to saving our planet's weird, wonderful
 and most threatened species.
date: 2019-11-01
tags: ["science","nature","ecology","conservation","environment","climate-change","animals","biodiversity","collaboration"]
slug: victoria_gill_what_a_nun_can_teach_a_scientist_about_ecology
---

OK, I would like to introduce all of you beautiful, curious-minded people to my favorite
animal in the world. This is the Peter Pan of the amphibian world. It's an axolotl. It's a
type of salamander, but it never fully grows up and climbs out of the water like other
salamanders do. And this little guy has X-Man-style powers, right? So if it loses any
limb, it can just completely regenerate. It's amazing. And, I mean, look at it — it's got
a face with a permanent smile.

It's framed by feathery gills. It's just ... how could you not love that? This particular
type of axolotl, a very close relative, is known as an achoque. It is equally as cute, and
it lives in just one place in a lake in the north of Mexico. It's called Lake Pátzcuaro,
and as you can see, it is stunningly beautiful. But unfortunately, it's been so overfished
and so badly polluted that the achoque is dying out altogether. And this is something
that's a scenario that's playing out all over the world. We're living through an
extinction crisis, and species are particularly vulnerable when they're evolutionarily
tailored to just one little niche or maybe one lake. But this is TED, right? So this is
where I give you the big idea, the big solution. So how do you save one special weird
species from going extinct? Well, the answer, at least my answer, isn't a grand
technological intervention. It's actually really simple.

It's that you find people who know all about this animal and you ask them and you listen
to them and you work with them, if they're up for that. So I want to tell you about how
I've seen that in science, and in conservation in particular, if scientists don't team up
with local people who have really valuable knowledge but a practical wisdom that's not
going to be published in any academic journal, they can really miss the point. Scientists
and science as an enterprise can fall at the first hurdle if it rushes in knowing that
it's the experts that know best. But when scientists shake off those academic constraints
and really look to people who have a totally different but really important perspective on
what they're trying to do, it can genuinely save the world, one wonderfully weird
amphibian at a time. So, in the case of the achoque, these are the people you need on your
team.

These are the Sisters of the Immaculate Health. They are nuns who have a convent in
Pátzcuaro, they live in Pátzcuaro, and they have a shared history with the achoque. And it
is so mind-bogglingly wonderful that it drew me all the way there to make an audio
documentary about them, and I even have the unflattering selfie to prove it. There is a
room at the center of their convent, though, that looks like this. It's very strange. It's
lined with all these tanks full of fresh water and hundreds of achoques. And that's
because this creature, because of its regenerative abilities, it's believed has healing
powers if you consume it. So the sisters actually make and sell a medicine using achoques.
I bought a bottle of it. So this is it. It tastes a bit like honey, but the sisters reckon
it is good for all kinds of particularly respiratory ailments. So I just want you to have
a listen, if you will, to a clip of Sister Ofelia.

Sister Ofelia: (speaks in Spanish)

(Interpreter voice-over) Our convent was founded by Dominican nuns here in Pátzcuaro in
1747. Sometime after that, our sisters started to make the achoque syrup. We didn't
discover the properties of the achoque. That was the original people from around here,
since ancient times. But we then started to make the syrup, too. The locals knew that, and
they came to offer us the animals.

Victoria Gill: I see. So the achoques are part of making that syrup. What does the syrup
treat, and what is it for?

SO: (speaks in Spanish)

(Interpreter voice-over) It's good for coughs, asthma, bronchitis, the lungs and back
pain.

VG: And so you've harnessed that power in a syrup, in a medicine. Can you tell me how it's
made? You're shaking your head and smiling. 

VG: Yeah, they're not up for sharing the centuries-old secret recipe.

But the decline in the achoque actually nearly put a halt to that medicine production
altogether, which is why the sisters started this. It's the world's first achoque farm.
All they wanted was a healthy, sustainable population so that they could continue to make
that medicine, but what they created at the same time was a captive breeding program for a
critically endangered species. And fast forward a few years, and these scientists that you
can see in this picture from Chester Zoo all the way over the in UK, not far from where I
live, and from Michoacana University in Morelia in Mexico have persuaded the sisters — it
took years of careful diplomacy — to join them in a research partnership. So the nuns show
the biologists how you rear perfectly healthy, very robust Pátzcuaro achoques, and the
scientists have put some of their funding into tanks, filters and pumps in this strange,
incongruous but amazing room.

This is the kind of partnership that can save a species. But I don't think I see enough of
this sort of thing, and I have been ludicrously lucky in my job. I've traveled to loads of
places and just basically followed around brilliant people who are trying to use science
to answer big questions and solve problems. I've hung out with scientists who have solved
the mystery of the origin of the menopause by tracking killer whales off the north Pacific
coast. And I've followed around scientists who've planted cameras in Antarctic penguin
colonies, because they were looking to capture the impacts of climate change as it
happens. But it's this team that really stuck with me, that really showed me the impact
that these delicate but really important relationships can have. And I think the reason
that it stuck with me as well is because it's not common. And one of the reasons it's not
common is because our traditional approach of the hierarchical system of academic
achievement doesn't exactly encourage the type of humility where scientists will look to
nonscientists and really ask for their input.

In fact, I think we have a bit of a tradition, especially in the West, of a kind of
academically blinkered hubris that has kept science historically an enterprise for the
elite. And I think although that's moved on, it continues to be its downfall on
occasion. So here's my example from history and my takedown of a scientific hero. Sir
Ernest Shackleton and his Trans-Antarctic Expedition more than a century ago, the
celebrated ill-fated adventure. On his way there, Shackleton just didn't listen to the
whalers in South Georgia. They knew that region, and they told him you won't get through
the ice this year. It's too widespread, it's too far north, it's too dangerous. And look
what happened. I mean, granted, that great adventure, that story of heroic leadership that
we still tell, where he saved every single one of his men, we wouldn't be telling that
story if he'd just hightailed it for home and taken their advice.

But it cost him his ship, I would imagine quite a lot of cold injuries among the team, a
good few cases of PTSD and Mrs. Chippy, the ship's cat, had to be shot because the team
couldn't afford any extra food as they fought to survive. Now, that was all a very long
time ago, but as I've prepared for this talk, I've revisited some of the stories that I
have covered, where these really unusual collaborations made a real positive difference.
So I spoke to former poachers whose knowledge of where they used to hunt illegally is now
really important in conservation projects in those same places. And I spoke to an amazing
artist whose own experience of mental health struggles has actually paved the way for him
to take a role in designing and creating a new, really innovative and beautiful mental
health ward in a hospital. Most recently, I worked here, in the Chernobyl Exclusion Zone,
with a team of scientists that have been working there for decades.

One of their experiments growing crops in that area has now turned into this. It's
Chernobyl's first vodka.

It's pretty good, too! I've tasted it. And this is actually, although it looks like a
niche product, it's set to be the first consumer product to come out of the exclusion zone
since the nuclear accident. And that's actually the result of years of conversation with
local communities who still live on the periphery of that abandoned land and want to know
when they can — and if they can — safely grow food and build businesses and rebuild their
communities and their lives. This was a product of humility, of listening, and I saw that
in spades when I visited Pátzcuaro. So I watched as a decades-experienced conservation
biologist called Gerardo Garcia listened and watched super carefully as a nun in a full
habit and wimple and latex gloves showed him how, if you tap an achoque on the head really
gently, it'll open its mouth so you can quickly get a DNA swab with a Q-tip.

When scientists team up with, look to and defer to people who have a really valuable
perspective on what they're trying to do but a totally different outlook, something really
special can happen. Now, there is a truly global and a very, very ambitious example of this
called the International Panel on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services. Now, that is not a
snappy title, but stick with me. This organization includes more than 130 countries, and
it's aiming to do nothing less than assess the state of the natural world across our
entire planet. So it recently published this global assessment on the state of nature, and
that could be the foundation for an international agreement where all of those nations
could sign up to finally take action to tackle the biodiversity crisis that's happening on
planet Earth right now. Now, I know from trying to communicate, trying to report on reports
like this, on assessments like this for a broad audience, that these big international
groups can seem so high-level as to be kind of out of reach and nebulous, but there's a
group of human beings at the center of them, the report's authors, who have this
formidable task of bringing together all of that biological and ecological information
that paints a clear and accurate picture of the state of the natural world.

And 10 years before this panel even set out to do that, to put that assessment together,
they created what's called a "cultural concept framework." This is essentially a cultural
concept translation dictionary for all of the different ways that we talk about the
natural world. So it formally recognizes, for example, that "Mother Earth" and "nature"
means the same thing. And what that means is that Indigenous and local knowledge can be
brought into the same document and given the weight and merit that it deserves in that
assessment of what state our natural environment is in. And that is absolutely critical,
because an Inuit hunter might never publish in an academic journal, but I'll bet you she
knows more about the changes to her home Arctic community because of climate change than a
scientist who spent many years going to and from that region taking measurements. And
collectively, Indigenous people are the caretakers of an estimated 25 percent of the
entire global land surface, including some of the most biodiverse places on the
planet.

So imagine how much we're missing if we don't cross those cultural boundaries, or at least
try to, when we're trying to figure out how the world works and how to protect it. Every
single research proposal is a new opportunity to do exactly that. So what if, every time a
research project was proposed, it had to include a suggestion of a person or a group of
people — local farmers, Indigenous community leaders, nuns — that researchers wanted to
bring into the fold, invite into their team and listen to? I just want to let Sister Ofelia
give her view of why she is so particularly driven and dedicated to the survival of the
achoque.

VG: Sister Ofelia, do you think that saving this species from extinction, is that part of
your work for God?

SO: (speaks in Spanish)

(Interpreter voice-over) It's the responsibility of every human being not to harm those
who live around us. That's all living things. We're all created not only just to survive
but to be happy and to make others happy. All of us here are providing happiness by
protecting this animal, and we're also making Him happy.

(Nuns singing)VG: I feel like I should sort of slink off and let the nuns sing me out,
because it sounds so lovely. But did you hear that? "We're providing happiness." Now,
that's not a protocol you'd ever see outlined in any formal research project proposal
—

but it's the impetus behind what's become the most successful breeding program in the
world of an animal that was on the very brink of being wiped out. And isn't that just
wonderful? Thank you.

<!--
ad_duration=3.33
comment_count=16
event="TED@NAS"
external_duration=0
external_start_time=0
has_talk_citation=0
intro_duration=11.82
is_subtitle_required="False"
is_talk_featured="True"
language="en"
language_swap="False"
native_language="en"
number_of_related_talks=6
number_of_speakers=1
number_of_subtitled_videos=10
number_of_tags=9
number_of_talk_download_languages=11
number_of_talk_more_resources=1
number_of_talk_recommendations=1
number_of_talks_take_actions=0
post_ad_duration=0.83
published_timestamp="2020-02-12 16:01:36"
recording_date="2019-11-01"
speaker_description="Science and environment correspondent"
speaker_is_published=1
speaker_name="Victoria Gill"
talk_name="What a nun can teach a scientist about ecology"
talk_recommendations_blurb="More resources curated by Victoria Gill"
talks_tags=["science","nature","ecology","conservation","environment","climate-change","animals","biodiversity","collaboration"]
talks_take_action=[]
url_audio="https://download.ted.com/talks/VictoriaGill_2019S.mp3?apikey=acme-roadrunner"
url_photo_speaker="https://pe.tedcdn.com/images/ted/595c8377a38bb64410e87dc32e93eeaa289c4fc8_254x191.jpg"
url_photo_talk="https://s3.amazonaws.com/talkstar-photos/uploads/69f6199f-d394-4076-8b38-c6019572d3b7/VictoriaGill_2019S-embed.jpg"
url_webpage="https://www.ted.com/talks/victoria_gill_what_a_nun_can_teach_a_scientist_about_ecology"
video_type_name="TED Institute Talk"
-->