---
title: For the love of birds
speaker: Washington Wachira
description: >-
 From the glorious crested guinea fowl to the adulterous African jacana to
 vultures that can pick a zebra carcass clean in 30 minutes, Washington Wachira
 wants us all to get to know the marvelous species of birds that share the planet
 with us. If you're not already a fan of earth's feathermakers -- or concerned
 about their conservation -- you will be after you watch this delightful
 talk.
date: 2017-08-27
tags: ["africa","animals","beauty","ecology","biodiversity","nature","birds","sustainability"]
slug: washington_wachira_for_the_love_of_birds
---

With me here today I brought something beautiful. This is a feather from one of the most
beautiful birds we have in Kenya, the crested guinea fowl. But this feather is more than
just that. If you've taken time when you are outdoors to look at the feathers around you,
you'll have noticed that there is this huge variety of different sizes, shapes and even
colors. The feather is one of the most astonishing pieces of technology invented by the
natural world, and for centuries, this feather has helped birds to keep dry, to keep warm
and even power flight. Only one section of the tree of life can actually make a feather.
Among all the world's animals, birds are the only ones who can make something like what
I'm holding today. I personally have given them a nickname, and I like to call them the
feathermakers. It is the major difference between birds and any other animals we have on
earth, and if you can't make a feather, you cannot call yourself a bird.

For us humans, who are earthbound, birds represent freedom. This feather has enabled birds
to conquer gravity and take to the air in an extraordinary way. Don't you sometimes wish
you could fly like a bird? Birds are my passion, and I want to change the way each one of
you thinks about them. The easiest reason I love them so much is because they are
beautiful. There are 10,000 species in the world, and each one of them is uniquely
beautiful. Birds are amazing, and this talk is dedicated to all the birds of the
world.

Indeed, these birds have been part of our lives and cultures all over the world for
centuries, and every society has a story about birds. You probably have heard childhood
stories of different birds and how they relate with man. I personally recently learned
that our human ancestors would follow flocks of vultures and then they would help them to
identify where carcasses have been dropped by large carnivores, and these humans will
scavenge and eat part of that meat. Birds have been used as brands and labels all over the
world. You know the bald eagle? It was chosen as the national emblem for the US because of
its majestic strength, beautiful looks and even a long lifespan. And just like us humans
who have managed to live in virtually all habitats of this earth, birds have also
conquered the world. From birds such as these beautiful penguins that live in the cold ice
caps to even others like the larks, who live in the hottest deserts you can
imagine.

Indeed, these species have conquered this world. Birds also build houses like us. The real
pros in housebuilding are a group of birds we call the weaverbirds, and this name they
were given because of the way in which they weave their nests. An interesting one: birds
also love and date just like us humans. In fact, you'll be surprised to know that males
dress to impress the women, and I'll show you how. So here we have a long-tailed
widowbird, and this is how they would normally look. But when it comes to the breeding
season, everything changes, and this is how he looks.(Audience murmurs)Yeah? Birds also,
multiple species of them, do love to touch and cuddle just like humans. And I know you're
wondering about this one. Yes, they kiss too, sometimes very deeply.

Some have even learned to cheat on their spouses.

For example, the African jacana: the females will mate with multiple males and then she
takes off to find other males to mate with and she leaves the male behind to take care of
the chicks.

And birds help us so much, and they play very crucial roles in our ecosystems each day.
Vultures clean up our environment by literally digesting disease-causing pathogens, and
they finish carcasses that would otherwise cost us lots of money to clear from the
environment. A sizable flock of vultures is capable of bringing down a carcass the size of
a zebra straight to the bone within just about 30 minutes. Owls help to rid the
environments of rodents and this helps us a lot because it saves us money — we don't lose
our crops — and secondly, we don't have to buy harmful chemicals to handle these rodents.
The beautiful sunbirds we see in our environments are part of nature's pollination crew,
and they help our plants to form fruits. Together with other pollinators like insects,
they have actually helped us to get most of the food crops that we depend on for many
years. Unfortunately, the story of birds is by far not perfect.

They are faced by numerous challenges every day wherever they live. Top on the threats
facing birds is habitat loss and reduced food availability. Birds are also hunted,
especially migratory species and ducks that congregate in water bodies. Poisoning is
happening to flocks that like to stick together, especially in places like rice schemes.
Moreover, power lines are electrocuting birds and wind farms are slicing birds when they
fly through the blades. Recently, we've heard the talk of climate change making a lot of
headlines, and it's also affecting birds, because birds are being forced to migrate to
better breeding and feeding grounds because unfortunately where they used to live is no
longer habitable. My own perspective towards birds was changed when I was a small boy in
high school, and there was this boy who struck, injuring the wing and the leg of a bird we
called the augur buzzard.

I was standing there, just a mere 14-year-old, and I imagined a human being in a similar
situation, because this bird could not help itself. So even if I was hardly any biologist
by then, I gathered with three of my friends and we decided to house the bird until it had
regained strength and then let it free. Interestingly, it accepted to feed on beef from
our school kitchen, and we hunted termites around the compound for its dinner every day.
After a few days, it had regained strength and we released it. We were so happy to see it
flap its wings and fly off gracefully. And that experience changed the way we looked at
birds. We went on to actually make a magazine, and we called it the Hawk Magazine, and
this was in honor of this bird that we had helped within our own high school. Those
experiences in high school made me the conservationist I am today. And a passion for birds
should especially matter for Africa and all Africans, because among all other continents,
Africa hosts some of the most amazing bird species you can find anywhere in the
world.

Imagine having a name like "shoebill." That's the name of that bird. And there are
countries like DR Congo, Tanzania, Uganda and Kenya who are leading the continent in
highest numbers of diversity when it comes to the species. These birds continue to provide
the continent with very crucial ecosystem services that Africa needs. Moreover, there is
huge potential for Africa to lead the world in avian tourism. The economy will definitely
benefit. Imagine how many communities will benefit from groups of tourists visiting their
villages just to see the endemic birds that can only be found in those villages. How can we
help birds together? There is now a chance for all of you to turn your passion for birds
into contributing to their continued survival, and you can do that by becoming a citizen
scientist. Citizen science is a growing trend around the world, and we are having
scenarios where people are sharing information with the rest of the community about
traffic updates, security alerts and so on.

That is exactly what we realized as bird-watchers, and we thought, because birds are found
everywhere, if we've got all of you and everyone else in Africa to tell us the birds they
find where they live, where they school, or even where they work, then we can be able to
come up with a map of every single species, and from there scientists will be able to
actually prioritize conservation efforts to those habitats that matter the most. Take for
example these two projects, the Africa Raptor DataBank, which is mapping all birds of prey
in the continent of Africa, and the Kenya Bird Map, which is mapping about 1,100 species
that occur in my country, Kenya. These two projects now have online databases that are
allowing people to submit data, and this is converted into very interactive websites that
the public can consume and make decisions from. But when we started, there was a big
challenge. We received many complaints from bird-watchers, and they will say, "I'm in a
village, and I cannot access a computer.

How do I tell you what birds live in my home, or where I school, or where I work?" So we
were forced to renovate our strategy and come up with a sustainable solution. It was easy:
we immediately realized that mobile phones were becoming increasingly common in Africa and
most of the regions could get access to one. So we came up with mobile phone applications
that you can use on your iPhone and on your Android phone, and we made them freely
available for every bird-watching enthusiast out there. So we came up with BirdLasser,
which is used by the Kenya Bird Map, and also we have the African Raptor Observations,
which is now used by the African Raptor DataBank. This was a huge breakthrough in our work
and it made us get enormous amounts of data from every birder out there in the regions.
With this, we realized that citizen science is indeed very powerful, the reason being,
citizen science is adaptive.

And we were able to actually convert many bird-watchers to start sharing new information
with us. When we were starting, we didn't know that birds could be a huge gateway to
approaching conservation of other forms of animals. Interestingly, now in the Virtual
Museum for Africa, we have maps for dragonflies and damselflies, butterflies and moths,
reptiles, frogs, orchids, spiders, scorpions, and yes, we are even mapping mushrooms. Who
could have imagined mapping mushrooms? So this showed us that indeed we've created a
community of people who care about nature in Africa. I hereby call upon all of you to join
me in promoting the value of birds within your communities. Please just tell your friends
about birds, for we are always inclined to love and care for that which we know. Please
spend a few minutes in your free time when you are at work, at school, or maybe at home,
to at least look around you and see which beautiful birds are there.

Come join us in citizen science and tell us the birds you're finding in the places where
you visit. Even simpler, you could buy your child or your sibling a pair of binoculars or
a bird book and let them just appreciate how beautiful these birds are. Because maybe one
day they will want to care for that one which they know and love. The children indeed are
our future. Let us please teach them to love our feathermakers, because the love of birds
can be a huge gateway to appreciating all forms of nature. Thank you very
much.

Thank you.

<!--
ad_duration=3.33
comment_count=12
event="TEDGlobal 2017"
external_start_time=0
has_talk_citation=0
intro_duration=11.82
is_subtitle_required="False"
is_talk_featured="True"
language="en"
language_swap="False"
native_language="en"
number_of_related_talks=6
number_of_speakers=1
number_of_subtitled_videos=21
number_of_tags=8
number_of_talk_download_languages=22
number_of_talk_more_resources=0
number_of_talk_recommendations=1
number_of_talks_take_actions=3
post_ad_duration=0.83
published_timestamp="2017-11-06 20:32:58"
recording_date="2017-08-27"
speaker_description="Wildlife ecologist, nature photographer and safari guide"
speaker_is_published=1
speaker_name="Washington Wachira"
talk_more_resources=[]
talk_name="For the love of birds"
talk_recommendations_blurb="Further reading about birds, curated by Washington Wachira"
talks_tags=["africa","animals","beauty","ecology","biodiversity","nature","birds","sustainability"]
url_audio="https://download.ted.com/talks/WashingtonWachira_2017G.mp3?apikey=acme-roadrunner"
url_photo_speaker="https://pe.tedcdn.com/images/ted/7bef94b0fa8177bad0a10a5eef93c78ea64f3c2f_254x191.jpg"
url_photo_talk="https://s3.amazonaws.com/talkstar-photos/uploads/0f7a8ba4-4ad0-4a31-b794-5c6f64cf8d39/WashingtonWachira_2017G-embed.jpg"
url_webpage="https://www.ted.com/talks/washington_wachira_for_the_love_of_birds"
video_type_name="TED Stage Talk"
-->