---
title: A wall won't solve America's border problems
speaker: Will Hurd
description: >-
 "Building a 30-foot-high concrete structure from sea to shining sea is the most
 expensive and least effective way to do border security," says Congressman Will
 Hurd, a Republican from Texas whose district encompasses two times zones and
 shares an 820-mile border with Mexico. Speaking from Washington, DC in a video
 interview with former state attorney general Anne Milgram, Hurd discusses the US
 government's border policy and its controversial detention and child separation
 practices -- and lays out steps toward a better future at the border. (Recorded
 at the TED World Theater in New York on September 10, 2019)
date: 2019-09-10
tags: ["immigration","government","united-states","refugees","society","social-change","politics","community"]
slug: will_hurd_a_wall_won_t_solve_america_s_border_problems
---

Anne Milgram: Congressman, I was about to introduce you and say a little more —Will Hurd:
Hey, Anne. How are you? AM: Hi, how are you doing? Thank you so much for joining us
tonight. We're so lucky to have you here with us. I've already explained that you're
actually in Washington because you're working. And I was about to tell folks that you
represent the 23rd district of Texas. But maybe you could tell us a little bit about your
district and describe it for us. WH: Sure, my district in Southwest Texas is 29 counties,
two time zones, 820 miles of border from Eagle Pass, Texas all the way to El Paso. It
takes 10 and a half hours to drive across my district at 80 miles an hour, which is the
speed limit in most of the district. And I found out a couple of weekends ago, it's not
the speed limit in all the district.

It's a 71-percent Latino district, and it's the district that I've been representing for
now my third term in Congress. And when you think about the issue of the border, I have
more border than any other member of Congress. I spent nine and a half years as an
undercover officer in the CIA, chasing bad people all across the country. So when it comes
to securing our border, it's something I know a little bit about. AM: One of the things I
learned recently which I hadn't known before is that your district is actually the size, I
think, of the state of Georgia? WH: That's right. It's larger than 26 states, roughly the
size of the state of Georgia. So it's pretty big. AM: So as an expert in national security
and as a member of Congress, you've been called upon to think about issues related to
immigration, and in recent years, particularly about the border wall. What is your
reaction to President Trump's statement that we need a big, beautiful wall that would
stretch across our border, and at 18 to 30 feet high? WH: I've been saying this since I
first ran for Congress back in 2009, this is not a new topic, that building a 30-foot-high
concrete structure from sea to shining sea is the most expensive and least effective way
to do border security.

There are parts of the border where Border Patrol's response time to a threat is measured
in hours to days. If your response time is measured in hours to days, then a wall is not a
physical barrier. We should be having technology along the border, we should have
operation control of our border, which means we know everything that's going back and
forth across it. We can do a lot of that with technology. We also need more folks within
our border patrol. But in addition to doing all this, one of the things we should be able
to do is streamline legal immigration. If you're going to be a productive member of our
society, let's get you here as quickly as possible, but let's do it legally. And if we're
able to streamline that, then you're going to see some of the pressures relieved along our
border and allow men and women in Border Patrol to focus on human trafficking and
drug-trafficking organizations as well. AM: Congressman, there's also been a conversation
nationally about using emergency funds to build the border wall and taking those funds
from the United States military.

What has your position been on that issue? WH: I'm one of the few Republicans up here that
has opposed that effort. We are just now rebuilding our military, and taking funds away
from making sure that our brothers and sisters, our wives and our husbands have the
training and equipment they need in order to take care of us in far-flung places — taking
money away from them is not an efficient use of our resources, especially if it's going to
build a ... you know, I always say it's a fourth-century solution to a 21st-century
problem. And the reality is, what we should be focusing on is some of the other root
causes of this problem, and many of your speakers today have talked about that. Some of
those key root problems are violence, lack of economic opportunity and extreme poverty,
specifically, in the Northern Triangle: El Salvador, Guatemala and Honduras. We should be
working —AM: I was going to ask what you would recommend United States government does to
address the underlying, what we call push factors, or root causes in those three countries
in Central America? WH: One of the things I learned as an undercover officer in the CIA is
be nice with nice guys and tough with tough guys.

And one of the principles of being nice with nice guys is to strengthen our alliances. We
have a number of programs currently in these three countries that USAID and the State
Department is doing to address this violence issue. And we know, in El Salvador, one of
the problems was that the police were corrupt. And so we've worked with the Salvadorians
to purge the police, rehire new folks, use community policing tactics. These are tactics
the men and women in the United States of America and police forces use every single day.
And when we did this in certain communities, guess what happened? We saw a decrease in the
violence that was happening in those communities. And then we also saw a decrease in the
number of people that were leaving those areas to try to come to the United States
illegally. So it's a fraction of the cost to solve a problem there, before it ultimately
reaches our border.

And one of the reasons that you have violence and crime is political corruption and the
lack of central governments to protect its citizens. And so this is something we should be
continuing to work on. We shouldn't be decreasing the amount of money that we have that
we're sending to these countries. I actually think we should be increasing it. I believe
the first thing — we should have done this months ago — is select a special representative
for the Northern Triangle. That's a senior diplomat that's going to work to make sure
we're using all of our levers of power to help these three countries, and then that we're
doing it in a coordinated effort. This is not just a problem for the United States and
Mexico, this is a problem for the entire western hemisphere. So, where is the Organization
of American States? Where is the International Development Bank? We should be having a
collective plan to address these root causes. And when you talk about violence, a lot of
times, we talk about these terrible gangs like MS-13.

But it's also violence like women being beaten by their husbands. And they have nobody
else to go to, and they are unable to deal with this current problem. So these are the
types of issues that we should be increasing our diplomacy, increasing our economic
development aid. AM: Please, I want to take you now from thinking about the root causes in
Central America to thinking about the separation of children and families in the United
States. Starting in April 2018, the Trump administration began a no-tolerance policy for
immigrants, people seeking refugee status, asylum in the United States. And that led to
the separation of 2,700 children in the first year that that program was run. Now, I want
to address this with you, and I want to separate it up front into two different
conversations. One of the things that the administration did was file legal court papers,
saying that one of the primary purposes of the separations was to act as a deterrent
against people coming to the United States.

And I want to talk for a moment about that from a moral perspective and to get your
views. WH: We shouldn't be doing it, period. It's real simple. And guess what, it wasn't a
deterrent. You only saw an increase in the amount of illegal immigration. And when you're
sitting, debating a strategy, if somebody comes up with the idea of snatching a child out
of their mother's arms, you need to go back to the drawing board. This is not what the
United States of America stands for, this is not a Republican or a Democrat or independent
thing. This is a human decency thing. And so, using that strategy, it didn't achieve the
ultimate purpose. And ultimately, the amount of research that is done and the impact that
the detention of children has — especially if it's over 21 days — has on their development
and their future is disastrous. So we shouldn't be trying to detain children for any more
than 21 days, and we should be getting children, if they're in our custody, we should be
taking care of them humanely, and making sure they're with people that can provide them a
safe and loving environment. AM: I would challenge you even on the 21-day number, but for
the purposes of this conversation, I want to follow up on something you just said, which
is both that it's wrong to detain children, and that it's not effective.

So the question, then, is why does the administration continue to do it, when we've seen
900 additional children separated from their parents since the summer of 2018? Why is this
happening? WH: Well, that's something that you'd have to ultimately ask the administration.
These are questions that I've been asking. The Tornillo facility is in my district. These
are buildings that are not designed to hold anybody for multiple days, let alone children.
We should be making sure that if they are in our custody — a lot of times for the
uncompanied children, we don't have a ... we don't know of a patron or a family member in
the United States, and we should make sure that they're in facilities where they're able
to go to school and have proper food and health care. And if we're able to find a sponsor
or family member, let's get them into that custody, while they're waiting for their
immigration court case. That's the other issue here.

When you have a backlog of cases — I think it's now 900,000 cases that are backlogged — we
should be able to do an immigration hearing within nine months. I think most of the legal
community thinks that is enough time to do something like this, so that we can facilitate
whether someone, an individual, is able to stay in the United States or they're going to
have to be returned back to their home country, rather than being in this limbo for five
years. AM: If we think about the asylum system today, where people are coming and saying
that they have a credible threat, that they will be persecuted back home, and we think
about the fact that on average, it's about two years for someone to get an asylum hearing,
that many people are not represented as they go through that process, it makes me think
about something that they say in the health care space all the time, which is that every
system is perfectly designed to get the results it gets.

And so as you think about this and think about how we would redesign this system to not do
what we're doing, which is years and years of detention and separations and hardship for
people seeking — and again, asylum being a lawful United States government process — for
people seeking to enter our country lawfully. What should we do? WH: I tried to increase by
four billion dollars the amount of resources that HHS has in order to specifically deal,
ultimately, with children. I think we need more immigration judges in order to process
these cases, and I think we need to ensure that folks can get representation. I've been
able to work with a number of lawyers up and down the border to make sure they are being
able to get access to the folks that are having these problems. And so this is something
that we should be able to design. And ultimately, when it comes to children, we should be
doing everything we can when they're in our custody, in order to take care of them. AM: So
I have two more questions for you before I'm going to let you go back to
work.

The first is about our focus in the United States on the questions of immigration. Because
if you look at some of the statistics, you see that of people who are undocumented in the
United States, the majority of people have overstayed on visas, they haven't come through
the border. If you look at the people who try to enter the country who are on the
terrorist watch list, they enter overwhelmingly through the airports and not through the
border. If we look at drugs coming into the United States, which has been a huge part of
this conversation, the vast majority of those drugs come through our ports and through
other points of entry, not through backpacks on people crossing the border. So the thing I
always ask and I always worry about with government, is that we focus so much on one
thing, and my question for you is whether we are focused in this conversation nationally
about the border, every day and every minute of every day, whether we're looking
completely in the wrong direction. WH: I would agree with your premise.

When you have — let's start with the economic benefits. When you have 3.6 percent
unemployment, what does that mean? That means you need folks in every industry, whether
it's agriculture or artificial intelligence. So why aren't we streamlining legal
immigration? We should be able to make this market based in order to have folks come in
and be productive members of our society. When it comes to the drug issue you're talking
about, yes, it's in our ports of entry, but it's also coming in to our shores. Coast Guard
is only able to action 25 percent of the known intelligence they have on drugs coming into
our country. The metric that we should be measuring [is] are we seeing a decrease of
deaths from overdose from drugs overseas, are we seeing a decrease in illegal immigration?
It's not how many miles of fencing that we have ultimately built. And so we have benefited
from the brain drain of every other country for the last couple of decades.

I want to see that continue, and I want to see that continue with the hardworking drain.
And I can sell you this: at last Congress, Pete Aguilar, a Democrat from California, and I
had a piece of legislation called the USA Act: strong border security, streamline legal
immigration, fix DACA — 1.2 million kids who have only known the United States of America
as their home — these kids, or I should say young men and women, they are already
Americans, let's not have them go through any more uncertainty and make that ultimately
happen. We had 245 people that were willing to sign this bill into law, it wasn't allowed
to come forward under a Republican speaker, and also the current Democratic speaker hasn't
brought this bill through in something that we would be able to pass. AM: So I want to
close, and you are, perhaps, most famous — I don't know if that's fair — but you took a
road trip with Beto O'Rourke from your district to Washington, DC, and you've become known
for reaching across the aisle and engaging in these bipartisan conversations.

And one of the things I've seen you say repeatedly is to talk about how we are all united.
And I think, when we think about the language of immigration and we start hearing words
about enemies and militarization, I think the real question is: How do we convince all
Americans to understand what you say that more unites us than divides us? WH: Crisscrossing
a district like mine that's truly 50-50 — 50 percent Democrat, 50 percent Republican, it's
been very clear to me that way more unites us than divides us. And if we focus on those
things that we agree on, we'll all be better off. And I'm not going to get a perfect
attendance award for going to church, but I do remember when Jesus was in the Second
Temple and the Pharisees asked him what's the most important commandment, and he said to
"Love thy Lord God with all your heart, mind and soul." But people forget he also said,
"Equally as important, is to love thy neighbor like thyself." And if we remember that and
realize what it would mean, and what you would have to be going through to be living in a
situation that you may send your child on a 3,000-mile perilous journey, because that's
what you think the only thing for their future, the only thing that you can do to make
sure their future is bright, if we all remember that situation, and think what we would do
in that situation, I think we'd also be better off. AM: Thank you, Congressman.

Thank you so much for joining us tonight.

<!--
ad_duration=3.33
comment_count=17
event="TED Salon Border Stories"
external_start_time=0
has_talk_citation=0
intro_duration=11.82
is_subtitle_required="False"
is_talk_featured="True"
language="en"
language_swap="False"
native_language="en"
number_of_related_talks=6
number_of_speakers=2
number_of_subtitled_videos=11
number_of_tags=8
number_of_talk_download_languages=11
number_of_talk_more_resources=0
number_of_talk_recommendations=1
number_of_talks_take_actions=0
post_ad_duration=0.83
published_timestamp="2019-09-26 14:59:26"
recording_date="2019-09-10"
speaker_description="Politician"
speaker_is_published=1
speaker_name="Will Hurd"
talk_more_resources=[]
talk_name="A wall won't solve America's border problems"
talk_recommendations_blurb="More resources curated by Will Hurd"
talks_tags=["immigration","government","united-states","refugees","society","social-change","politics","community"]
talks_take_action=[]
url_audio="https://download.ted.com/talks/WillHurd_2019S.mp3?apikey=acme-roadrunner"
url_photo_speaker="https://pe.tedcdn.com/images/ted/827fc88df1c3132519493ac0508cf453be98d909_254x191.jpg"
url_photo_talk="https://s3.amazonaws.com/talkstar-photos/uploads/08f7ee63-ef77-423d-bb45-de4305fe0e15/WillHurd_2019S-embed.jpg"
url_webpage="https://www.ted.com/talks/will_hurd_a_wall_won_t_solve_america_s_border_problems"
video_type_name="TED Stage Talk"
-->