---
title: Nationalism vs. globalism: the new political divide
speaker: Yuval Noah Harari
description: >-
 How do we make sense of today's political divisions? In a wide-ranging conversation
 full of insight, historian Yuval Harari places our current turmoil in a broader
 context, against the ongoing disruption of our technology, climate, media -- even
 our notion of what humanity is for. This is the first of a series of TED
 Dialogues, seeking a thoughtful response to escalating political divisiveness.
 Make time (just over an hour) for this fascinating discussion between Harari and
 TED curator Chris Anderson.
date: 2017-02-15
tags: ["big-problems","climate-change","collaboration","democracy","future","economics","global-development","global-issues","history","humanity","identity","government","human-origins","intelligence","media","news","politics","social-change","society","technology","violence","war"]
slug: yuval_noah_harari_nationalism_vs_globalism_the_new_political_divide
---

Chris Anderson: Hello. Welcome to this TED Dialogues. It's the first of a series that's
going to be done in response to the current political upheaval. I don't know about you;
I've become quite concerned about the growing divisiveness in this country and in the
world. No one's listening to each other. Right? They aren't. I mean, it feels like we need
a different kind of conversation, one that's based on — I don't know, on reason,
listening, on understanding, on a broader context. That's at least what we're going to try
in these TED Dialogues, starting today. And we couldn't have anyone with us who I'd be
more excited to kick this off. This is a mind right here that thinks pretty much like no
one else on the planet, I would hasten to say. I'm serious.(Yuval Noah Harari laughs) I'm
serious. He synthesizes history with underlying ideas in a way that kind of takes your
breath away. So, some of you will know this book, "Sapiens." Has anyone here read
"Sapiens"?

I mean, I could not put it down. The way that he tells the story of mankind through big
ideas that really make you think differently — it's kind of amazing. And here's the
follow-up, which I think is being published in the US next week. YNH: Yeah, next week. CA:
"Homo Deus." Now, this is the history of the next hundred years. I've had a chance to read
it. It's extremely dramatic, and I daresay, for some people, quite alarming. It's a
must-read. And honestly, we couldn't have someone better to help make sense of what on
Earth is happening in the world right now. So a warm welcome, please, to Yuval Noah
Harari.

It's great to be joined by our friends on Facebook and around the Web. Hello, Facebook.
And all of you, as I start asking questions of Yuval, come up with your own questions, and
not necessarily about the political scandal du jour, but about the broader understanding
of: Where are we heading? You ready? OK, we're going to go. So here we are, Yuval: New York
City, 2017, there's a new president in power, and shock waves rippling around the world.
What on Earth is happening? YNH: I think the basic thing that happened is that we have lost
our story. Humans think in stories, and we try to make sense of the world by telling
stories. And for the last few decades, we had a very simple and very attractive story
about what's happening in the world. And the story said that, oh, what's happening is that
the economy is being globalized, politics is being liberalized, and the combination of the
two will create paradise on Earth, and we just need to keep on globalizing the economy and
liberalizing the political system, and everything will be wonderful.

And 2016 is the moment when a very large segment, even of the Western world, stopped
believing in this story. For good or bad reasons — it doesn't matter. People stopped
believing in the story, and when you don't have a story, you don't understand what's
happening. CA: Part of you believes that that story was actually a very effective story. It
worked. YNH: To some extent, yes. According to some measurements, we are now in the best
time ever for humankind. Today, for the first time in history, more people die from eating
too much than from eating too little, which is an amazing achievement.

Also for the first time in history, more people die from old age than from infectious
diseases, and violence is also down. For the first time in history, more people commit
suicide than are killed by crime and terrorism and war put together. Statistically, you
are your own worst enemy. At least, of all the people in the world, you are most likely to
be killed by yourself —

which is, again, very good news, compared —

compared to the level of violence that we saw in previous eras. CA: But this process of
connecting the world ended up with a large group of people kind of feeling left out, and
they've reacted. And so we have this bombshell that's sort of ripping through the whole
system. I mean, what do you make of what's happened? It feels like the old way that people
thought of politics, the left-right divide, has been blown up and replaced. How should we
think of this? YNH: Yeah, the old 20th-century political model of left versus right is now
largely irrelevant, and the real divide today is between global and national, global or
local. And you see it again all over the world that this is now the main struggle. We
probably need completely new political models and completely new ways of thinking about
politics. In essence, what you can say is that we now have global ecology, we have a
global economy but we have national politics, and this doesn't work together.

This makes the political system ineffective, because it has no control over the forces
that shape our life. And you have basically two solutions to this imbalance: either
de-globalize the economy and turn it back into a national economy, or globalize the
political system. CA: So some, I guess many liberals out there view Trump and his
government as kind of irredeemably bad, just awful in every way. Do you see any underlying
narrative or political philosophy in there that is at least worth understanding? How would
you articulate that philosophy? Is it just the philosophy of nationalism? YNH: I think the
underlying feeling or idea is that the political system — something is broken there. It
doesn't empower the ordinary person anymore. It doesn't care so much about the ordinary
person anymore, and I think this diagnosis of the political disease is correct. With
regard to the answers, I am far less certain. I think what we are seeing is the immediate
human reaction: if something doesn't work, let's go back.

And you see it all over the world, that people, almost nobody in the political system
today, has any future-oriented vision of where humankind is going. Almost everywhere, you
see retrograde vision: "Let's make America great again," like it was great — I don't know
— in the '50s, in the '80s, sometime, let's go back there. And you go to Russia a hundred
years after Lenin, Putin's vision for the future is basically, ah, let's go back to the
Tsarist empire. And in Israel, where I come from, the hottest political vision of the
present is: "Let's build the temple again." So let's go back 2,000 years backwards. So
people are thinking sometime in the past we've lost it, and sometimes in the past, it's
like you've lost your way in the city, and you say OK, let's go back to the point where I
felt secure and start again. I don't think this can work, but a lot of people, this is
their gut instinct. CA: But why couldn't it work? "America First" is a very appealing
slogan in many ways.

Patriotism is, in many ways, a very noble thing. It's played a role in promoting
cooperation among large numbers of people. Why couldn't you have a world organized in
countries, all of which put themselves first? YNH: For many centuries, even thousands of
years, patriotism worked quite well. Of course, it led to wars an so forth, but we
shouldn't focus too much on the bad. There are also many, many positive things about
patriotism, and the ability to have a large number of people care about each other,
sympathize with one another, and come together for collective action. If you go back to
the first nations, so, thousands of years ago, the people who lived along the Yellow River
in China — it was many, many different tribes and they all depended on the river for
survival and for prosperity, but all of them also suffered from periodical floods and
periodical droughts. And no tribe could really do anything about it, because each of them
controlled just a tiny section of the river. And then in a long and complicated process,
the tribes coalesced together to form the Chinese nation, which controlled the entire
Yellow River and had the ability to bring hundreds of thousands of people together to
build dams and canals and regulate the river and prevent the worst floods and droughts and
raise the level of prosperity for everybody.

And this worked in many places around the world. But in the 21st century, technology is
changing all that in a fundamental way. We are now living — all people in the world — are
living alongside the same cyber river, and no single nation can regulate this river by
itself. We are all living together on a single planet, which is threatened by our own
actions. And if you don't have some kind of global cooperation, nationalism is just not on
the right level to tackle the problems, whether it's climate change or whether it's
technological disruption. CA: So it was a beautiful idea in a world where most of the
action, most of the issues, took place on national scale, but your argument is that the
issues that matter most today no longer take place on a national scale but on a global
scale. YNH: Exactly. All the major problems of the world today are global in essence, and
they cannot be solved unless through some kind of global cooperation.

It's not just climate change, which is, like, the most obvious example people give. I
think more in terms of technological disruption. If you think about, for example,
artificial intelligence, over the next 20, 30 years pushing hundreds of millions of people
out of the job market — this is a problem on a global level. It will disrupt the economy
of all the countries. And similarly, if you think about, say, bioengineering and people
being afraid of conducting, I don't know, genetic engineering research in humans, it won't
help if just a single country, let's say the US, outlaws all genetic experiments in
humans, but China or North Korea continues to do it. So the US cannot solve it by itself,
and very quickly, the pressure on the US to do the same will be immense because we are
talking about high-risk, high-gain technologies. If somebody else is doing it, I can't
allow myself to remain behind.

The only way to have regulations, effective regulations, on things like genetic
engineering, is to have global regulations. If you just have national regulations, nobody
would like to stay behind. CA: So this is really interesting. It seems to me that this may
be one key to provoking at least a constructive conversation between the different sides
here, because I think everyone can agree that the start point of a lot of the anger that's
propelled us to where we are is because of the legitimate concerns about job loss. Work is
gone, a traditional way of life has gone, and it's no wonder that people are furious about
that. And in general, they have blamed globalism, global elites, for doing this to them
without asking their permission, and that seems like a legitimate complaint. But what I
hear you saying is that — so a key question is: What is the real cause of job loss, both
now and going forward?

To the extent that it's about globalism, then the right response, yes, is to shut down
borders and keep people out and change trade agreements and so forth. But you're saying, I
think, that actually the bigger cause of job loss is not going to be that at all. It's
going to originate in technological questions, and we have no chance of solving that
unless we operate as a connected world. YNH: Yeah, I think that, I don't know about the
present, but looking to the future, it's not the Mexicans or Chinese who will take the
jobs from the people in Pennsylvania, it's the robots and algorithms. So unless you plan
to build a big wall on the border of California —

the wall on the border with Mexico is going to be very ineffective. And I was struck when
I watched the debates before the election, I was struck that certainly Trump did not even
attempt to frighten people by saying the robots will take your jobs. Now even if it's not
true, it doesn't matter. It could have been an extremely effective way of frightening
people —

and galvanizing people: "The robots will take your jobs!" And nobody used that line. And
it made me afraid, because it meant that no matter what happens in universities and
laboratories, and there, there is already an intense debate about it, but in the
mainstream political system and among the general public, people are just unaware that
there could be an immense technological disruption — not in 200 years, but in 10, 20, 30
years — and we have to do something about it now, partly because most of what we teach
children today in school or in college is going to be completely irrelevant to the job
market of 2040, 2050. So it's not something we'll need to think about in 2040. We need to
think today what to teach the young people. CA: Yeah, no, absolutely. You've often written
about moments in history where humankind has ... entered a new era, unintentionally.
Decisions have been made, technologies have been developed, and suddenly the world has
changed, possibly in a way that's worse for everyone.

So one of the examples you give in "Sapiens" is just the whole agricultural revolution,
which, for an actual person tilling the fields, they just picked up a 12-hour backbreaking
workday instead of six hours in the jungle and a much more interesting
lifestyle.

So are we at another possible phase change here, where we kind of sleepwalk into a future
that none of us actually wants? YNH: Yes, very much so. During the agricultural revolution,
what happened is that immense technological and economic revolution empowered the human
collective, but when you look at actual individual lives, the life of a tiny elite became
much better, and the lives of the majority of people became considerably worse. And this
can happen again in the 21st century. No doubt the new technologies will empower the human
collective. But we may end up again with a tiny elite reaping all the benefits, taking all
the fruits, and the masses of the population finding themselves worse than they were
before, certainly much worse than this tiny elite. CA: And those elites might not even be
human elites. They might be cyborgs or —YNH: Yeah, they could be enhanced super humans.
They could be cyborgs. They could be completely nonorganic elites.

They could even be non-conscious algorithms. What we see now in the world is authority
shifting away from humans to algorithms. More and more decisions — about personal lives,
about economic matters, about political matters — are actually being taken by algorithms.
If you ask the bank for a loan, chances are your fate is decided by an algorithm, not by a
human being. And the general impression is that maybe Homo sapiens just lost it. The world
is so complicated, there is so much data, things are changing so fast, that this thing
that evolved on the African savanna tens of thousands of years ago — to cope with a
particular environment, a particular volume of information and data — it just can't handle
the realities of the 21st century, and the only thing that may be able to handle it is
big-data algorithms. So no wonder more and more authority is shifting from us to the
algorithms. CA: So we're in New York City for the first of a series of TED Dialogues with
Yuval Harari, and there's a Facebook Live audience out there.

We're excited to have you with us. We'll start coming to some of your questions and
questions of people in the room in just a few minutes, so have those coming. Yuval, if
you're going to make the argument that we need to get past nationalism because of the
coming technological ... danger, in a way, presented by so much of what's happening we've
got to have a global conversation about this. Trouble is, it's hard to get people really
believing that, I don't know, AI really is an imminent threat, and so forth. The things
that people, some people at least, care about much more immediately, perhaps, is climate
change, perhaps other issues like refugees, nuclear weapons, and so forth. Would you argue
that where we are right now that somehow those issues need to be dialed up? You've talked
about climate change, but Trump has said he doesn't believe in that. So in a way, your
most powerful argument, you can't actually use to make this case. YNH: Yeah, I think with
climate change, at first sight, it's quite surprising that there is a very close
correlation between nationalism and climate change.

I mean, almost always, the people who deny climate change are nationalists. And at first
sight, you think: Why? What's the connection? Why don't you have socialists denying
climate change? But then, when you think about it, it's obvious — because nationalism has
no solution to climate change. If you want to be a nationalist in the 21st century, you
have to deny the problem. If you accept the reality of the problem, then you must accept
that, yes, there is still room in the world for patriotism, there is still room in the
world for having special loyalties and obligations towards your own people, towards your
own country. I don't think anybody is really thinking of abolishing that. But in order to
confront climate change, we need additional loyalties and commitments to a level beyond
the nation. And that should not be impossible, because people can have several layers of
loyalty. You can be loyal to your family and to your community and to your nation, so why
can't you also be loyal to humankind as a whole?

Of course, there are occasions when it becomes difficult, what to put first, but, you
know, life is difficult. Handle it.

CA: OK, so I would love to get some questions from the audience here. We've got a
microphone here. Speak into it, and Facebook, get them coming, too. Howard Morgan: One of
the things that has clearly made a huge difference in this country and other countries is
the income distribution inequality, the dramatic change in income distribution in the US
from what it was 50 years ago, and around the world. Is there anything we can do to affect
that? Because that gets at a lot of the underlying causes. YNH: So far I haven't heard a
very good idea about what to do about it, again, partly because most ideas remain on the
national level, and the problem is global. I mean, one idea that we hear quite a lot about
now is universal basic income. But this is a problem. I mean, I think it's a good start,
but it's a problematic idea because it's not clear what "universal" is and it's not clear
what "basic" is.

Most people when they speak about universal basic income, they actually mean national
basic income. But the problem is global. Let's say that you have AI and 3D printers taking
away millions of jobs in Bangladesh, from all the people who make my shirts and my shoes.
So what's going to happen? The US government will levy taxes on Google and Apple in
California, and use that to pay basic income to unemployed Bangladeshis? If you believe
that, you can just as well believe that Santa Claus will come and solve the problem. So
unless we have really universal and not national basic income, the deep problems are not
going to go away. And also it's not clear what basic is, because what are basic human
needs? A thousand years ago, just food and shelter was enough. But today, people will say
education is a basic human need, it should be part of the package. But how much? Six
years? Twelve years? PhD? Similarly, with health care, let's say that in 20, 30, 40 years,
you'll have expensive treatments that can extend human life to 120, I don't
know.

Will this be part of the basket of basic income or not? It's a very difficult problem,
because in a world where people lose their ability to be employed, the only thing they are
going to get is this basic income. So what's part of it is a very, very difficult ethical
question. CA: There's a bunch of questions on how the world affords it as well, who pays.
There's a question here from Facebook from Lisa Larson: "How does nationalism in the US
now compare to that between World War I and World War II in the last century?"YNH: Well
the good news, with regard to the dangers of nationalism, we are in a much better position
than a century ago. A century ago, 1917, Europeans were killing each other by the
millions. In 2016, with Brexit, as far as I remember, a single person lost their life, an
MP who was murdered by some extremist. Just a single person. I mean, if Brexit was about
British independence, this is the most peaceful war of independence in human
history.

And let's say that Scotland will now choose to leave the UK after Brexit. So in the 18th
century, if Scotland wanted — and the Scots wanted several times — to break out of the
control of London, the reaction of the government in London was to send an army up north
to burn down Edinburgh and massacre the highland tribes. My guess is that if, in 2018, the
Scots vote for independence, the London government will not send an army up north to burn
down Edinburgh. Very few people are now willing to kill or be killed for Scottish or for
British independence. So for all the talk of the rise of nationalism and going back to the
1930s, to the 19th century, in the West at least, the power of national sentiments today
is far, far smaller than it was a century ago. CA: Although some people now, you hear
publicly worrying about whether that might be shifting, that there could actually be
outbreaks of violence in the US depending on how things turn out.

Should we be worried about that, or do you really think things have shifted? YNH: No, we
should be worried. We should be aware of two things. First of all, don't be hysterical. We
are not back in the First World War yet. But on the other hand, don't be complacent. We
reached from 1917 to 2017, not by some divine miracle, but simply by human decisions, and
if we now start making the wrong decisions, we could be back in an analogous situation to
1917 in a few years. One of the things I know as a historian is that you should never
underestimate human stupidity.

It's one of the most powerful forces in history, human stupidity and human violence.
Humans do such crazy things for no obvious reason, but again, at the same time, another
very powerful force in human history is human wisdom. We have both. CA: We have with us
here moral psychologist Jonathan Haidt, who I think has a question. Jonathan Haidt: Thanks,
Yuval. So you seem to be a fan of global governance, but when you look at the map of the
world from Transparency International, which rates the level of corruption of political
institutions, it's a vast sea of red with little bits of yellow here and there for those
with good institutions. So if we were to have some kind of global governance, what makes
you think it would end up being more like Denmark rather than more like Russia or
Honduras, and aren't there alternatives, such as we did with CFCs? There are ways to solve
global problems with national governments.

What would world government actually look like, and why do you think it would work? YNH:
Well, I don't know what it would look like. Nobody still has a model for that. The main
reason we need it is because many of these issues are lose-lose situations. When you have
a win-win situation like trade, both sides can benefit from a trade agreement, then this
is something you can work out. Without some kind of global government, national
governments each have an interest in doing it. But when you have a lose-lose situation
like with climate change, it's much more difficult without some overarching authority,
real authority. Now, how to get there and what would it look like, I don't know. And
certainly there is no obvious reason to think that it would look like Denmark, or that it
would be a democracy. Most likely it wouldn't. We don't have workable democratic models
for a global government. So maybe it would look more like ancient China than like modern
Denmark.

But still, given the dangers that we are facing, I think the imperative of having some
kind of real ability to force through difficult decisions on the global level is more
important than almost anything else. CA: There's a question from Facebook here, and then
we'll get the mic to Andrew. So, Kat Hebron on Facebook, calling in from Vail: "How would
developed nations manage the millions of climate migrants?"YNH: I don't know. CA: That's
your answer, Kat. 

YNH: And I don't think that they know either. They'll just deny the problem, maybe. CA: But
immigration, generally, is another example of a problem that's very hard to solve on a
nation-by-nation basis. One nation can shut its doors, but maybe that stores up problems
for the future. YNH: Yes, I mean — it's another very good case, especially because it's so
much easier to migrate today than it was in the Middle Ages or in ancient times. CA: Yuval,
there's a belief among many technologists, certainly, that political concerns are kind of
overblown, that actually, political leaders don't have that much influence in the world,
that the real determination of humanity at this point is by science, by invention, by
companies, by many things other than political leaders, and it's actually very hard for
leaders to do much, so we're actually worrying about nothing here. YNH: Well, first, it
should be emphasized that it's true that political leaders' ability to do good is very
limited, but their ability to do harm is unlimited.

There is a basic imbalance here. You can still press the button and blow everybody up. You
have that kind of ability. But if you want, for example, to reduce inequality, that's
very, very difficult. But to start a war, you can still do so very easily. So there is a
built-in imbalance in the political system today which is very frustrating, where you
cannot do a lot of good but you can still do a lot of harm. And this makes the political
system still a very big concern. CA: So as you look at what's happening today, and putting
your historian's hat on, do you look back in history at moments when things were going
just fine and an individual leader really took the world or their country backwards? YNH:
There are quite a few examples, but I should emphasize, it's never an individual leader. I
mean, somebody put him there, and somebody allowed him to continue to be there. So it's
never really just the fault of a single individual.

There are a lot of people behind every such individual. CA: Can we have the microphone
here, please, to Andrew? Andrew Solomon: You've talked a lot about the global versus the
national, but increasingly, it seems to me, the world situation is in the hands of
identity groups. We look at people within the United States who have been recruited by
ISIS. We look at these other groups which have formed which go outside of national bounds
but still represent significant authorities. How are they to be integrated into the
system, and how is a diverse set of identities to be made coherent under either national
or global leadership? YNH: Well, the problem of such diverse identities is a problem from
nationalism as well. Nationalism believes in a single, monolithic identity, and exclusive
or at least more extreme versions of nationalism believe in an exclusive loyalty to a
single identity. And therefore, nationalism has had a lot of problems with people wanting
to divide their identities between various groups.

So it's not just a problem, say, for a global vision. And I think, again, history shows
that you shouldn't necessarily think in such exclusive terms. If you think that there is
just a single identity for a person, "I am just X, that's it, I can't be several things, I
can be just that," that's the start of the problem. You have religions, you have nations
that sometimes demand exclusive loyalty, but it's not the only option. There are many
religions and many nations that enable you to have diverse identities at the same time. CA:
But is one explanation of what's happened in the last year that a group of people have got
fed up with, if you like, the liberal elites, for want of a better term, obsessing over
many, many different identities and them feeling, "But what about my identity? I am being
completely ignored here. And by the way, I thought I was the majority"? And that that's
actually sparked a lot of the anger. YNH: Yeah.

Identity is always problematic, because identity is always based on fictional stories that
sooner or later collide with reality. Almost all identities, I mean, beyond the level of
the basic community of a few dozen people, are based on a fictional story. They are not
the truth. They are not the reality. It's just a story that people invent and tell one
another and start believing. And therefore all identities are extremely unstable. They are
not a biological reality. Sometimes nationalists, for example, think that the nation is a
biological entity. It's made of the combination of soil and blood, creates the nation. But
this is just a fictional story. CA: Soil and blood kind of makes a gooey
mess.

YNH: It does, and also it messes with your mind when you think too much that I am a
combination of soil and blood. If you look from a biological perspective, obviously none
of the nations that exist today existed 5,000 years ago. Homo sapiens is a social animal,
that's for sure. But for millions of years, Homo sapiens and our hominid ancestors lived
in small communities of a few dozen individuals. Everybody knew everybody else. Whereas
modern nations are imagined communities, in the sense that I don't even know all these
people. I come from a relatively small nation, Israel, and of eight million Israelis, I
never met most of them. I will never meet most of them. They basically exist here. CA: But
in terms of this identity, this group who feel left out and perhaps have work taken away,
I mean, in "Homo Deus," you actually speak of this group in one sense expanding, that so
many people may have their jobs taken away by technology in some way that we could end up
with a really large — I think you call it a "useless class" — a class where traditionally,
as viewed by the economy, these people have no use. YNH: Yes. CA: How likely a possibility
is that?

Is that something we should be terrified about? And can we address it in any way? YNH: We
should think about it very carefully. I mean, nobody really knows what the job market will
look like in 2040, 2050. There is a chance many new jobs will appear, but it's not
certain. And even if new jobs do appear, it won't necessarily be easy for a 50-year old
unemployed truck driver made unemployed by self-driving vehicles, it won't be easy for an
unemployed truck driver to reinvent himself or herself as a designer of virtual
worlds. Previously, if you look at the trajectory of the industrial revolution, when
machines replaced humans in one type of work, the solution usually came from low-skill
work in new lines of business. So you didn't need any more agricultural workers, so people
moved to working in low-skill industrial jobs, and when this was taken away by more and
more machines, people moved to low-skill service jobs.

Now, when people say there will be new jobs in the future, that humans can do better than
AI, that humans can do better than robots, they usually think about high-skill jobs, like
software engineers designing virtual worlds. Now, I don't see how an unemployed cashier
from Wal-Mart reinvents herself or himself at 50 as a designer of virtual worlds, and
certainly I don't see how the millions of unemployed Bangladeshi textile workers will be
able to do that. I mean, if they are going to do it, we need to start teaching the
Bangladeshis today how to be software designers, and we are not doing it. So what will
they do in 20 years? CA: So it feels like you're really highlighting a question that's
really been bugging me the last few months more and more. It's almost a hard question to
ask in public, but if any mind has some wisdom to offer in it, maybe it's yours, so I'm
going to ask you: What are humans for? YNH: As far as we know, for nothing.

I mean, there is no great cosmic drama, some great cosmic plan, that we have a role to
play in. And we just need to discover what our role is and then play it to the best of our
ability. This has been the story of all religions and ideologies and so forth, but as a
scientist, the best I can say is this is not true. There is no universal drama with a role
in it for Homo sapiens. So —CA: I'm going to push back on you just for a minute, just from
your own book, because in "Homo Deus," you give really one of the most coherent and
understandable accounts about sentience, about consciousness, and that unique sort of
human skill. You point out that it's different from intelligence, the intelligence that
we're building in machines, and that there's actually a lot of mystery around it. How can
you be sure there's no purpose when we don't even understand what this sentience thing is?
I mean, in your own thinking, isn't there a chance that what hu

<!--
ad_duration=3.33
event="TED Dialogues"
external_start_time=0
has_talk_citation=0
intro_duration=11.82
is_subtitle_required="False"
is_talk_featured="True"
language="en"
language_swap="False"
native_language="en"
number_of_related_talks=6
number_of_speakers=2
number_of_subtitled_videos=23
number_of_tags=22
number_of_talk_download_languages=23
number_of_talk_more_resources=5
number_of_talk_recommendations=0
number_of_talks_take_actions=0
post_ad_duration=0.83
published_timestamp="2017-02-20 15:35:24"
recording_date="2017-02-15"
speaker_description="Historian, author"
speaker_is_published=1
speaker_name="Yuval Noah Harari"
talk_name="Nationalism vs. globalism: the new political divide"
talks_tags=["big-problems","climate-change","collaboration","democracy","future","economics","global-development","global-issues","history","humanity","identity","government","human-origins","intelligence","media","news","politics","social-change","society","technology","violence","war"]
talks_take_action=[]
url_audio="https://download.ted.com/talks/YuvalNoahHarari_2017S.mp3?apikey=acme-roadrunner"
url_photo_speaker="https://pe.tedcdn.com/images/ted/a3683d72e78df0dfd69139688b14900ec498fc8f_254x191.jpg"
url_photo_talk="https://s3.amazonaws.com/talkstar-photos/uploads/30874dcf-4e45-4fdc-8d60-2a2d312249df/YuvalNoahHarari_2017S-embed.jpg"
url_webpage="https://www.ted.com/talks/yuval_noah_harari_nationalism_vs_globalism_the_new_political_divide"
video_type_name="TED Stage Talk"
-->