---
title: Why it's worth listening to people you disagree with
speaker: Zachary R. Wood
description: >-
 We get stronger, not weaker, by engaging with ideas and people we disagree with,
 says Zachary R. Wood. In an important talk about finding common ground, Wood
 makes the case that we can build empathy and gain understanding by engaging
 tactfully and thoughtfully with controversial ideas and unfamiliar perspectives.
 "Tuning out opposing viewpoints doesn't make them go away," Wood says. "To
 achieve progress in the face of adversity, we need a genuine commitment to
 gaining a deeper understanding of humanity."
date: 2018-04-10
tags: ["politics","activism","social-change","humanity","society","communication","community","collaboration","empathy","race"]
slug: zachary_r_wood_why_it_s_worth_listening_to_people_you_disagree_with
---

In 1994, Charles Murray and Richard Herrnstein coauthored "The Bell Curve," an extremely
controversial book which claims that on average, some races are smarter and more likely to
succeed than others. Murray and Herrnstein also suggest that a lack of critical
intelligence explains the prominence of violent crime in poor African-American
communities. But Charles Murray and Richard Herrnstein are not the only people who think
this. In 2012, a writer, journalist and political commentator named John Derbyshire wrote
an article that was supposed to be a non-black version of the talk that many black parents
feel they have to give their kids today: advice on how to stay safe. In it, he offered
suggestions such as: "Do not attend events likely to draw a lot of blacks," "Stay out of
heavily black neighborhoods" and "Do not act the Good Samaritan to blacks in distress."
And yet, in 2016, I invited John Derbyshire as well as Charles Murray to speak at my
school, knowing full well that I would be giving them a platform and attention for ideas
that I despised and rejected.

But this is just a further evolution of a journey of uncomfortable learning throughout my
life. When I was 10 years old, my mother was diagnosed with schizophrenia, a mental illness
characterized by mood swings and paranoid delusions. Throughout my life, my mother's rage
would turn our small house into a minefield. Yet, though I feared her rage on a daily
basis, I also learned so much from her. Our relationship was complicated and challenging,
and at the age of 14, it was decided that I needed to live apart from her. But over the
years, I've come to appreciate some of the important lessons my mother taught me about
life. She was the first person who spoke to me about learning from the other side. And
she, like me, was born and raised in a family of committed liberal democrats. Yet, she
encouraged me to see the world and the issues our world faces as complex, controversial
and ever-changing. One day, I came across the phrase "affirmative action" in a book I was
reading.

And when I asked her what the term meant, she spent what felt like an hour giving me a
thorough and thoughtful explanation that would make sense to a small child. She even made
the topic sound at least as interesting as any of my professors have. She explained the
many reasons why people of various political views challenge and support affirmative
action, stressing that, while she strongly supported it herself, it was important for me
to view the issue as a controversial one with a long history, a questionable future and a
host of complicating factors. While affirmative action can increase the presence of
minorities at elite educational institutions, she felt that it could also disadvantage
hardworking people of different races from more affluent backgrounds. My mom wanted me to
understand that I should never just write off opinions that I disagreed with or disliked,
because there was always something to learn from the perspectives of others, even when
doing so might be difficult. But life at home with my mom was not the only aspect of my
journey that has been formative and uncomfortable.

In fourth grade, she decided that I should attend a private school in order to receive the
best education possible. As a black student attending predominantly white private schools,
I've encountered attitudes and behaviors that reflected racial stereotypes. Several of my
friends' parents assumed within minutes of meeting me that my best skill was playing
basketball. And it really upset me to think that my race made it harder for them to see me
as a student who loved reading, writing and speaking. Experiences like this motivated me
to work tirelessly to disprove what I knew people had assumed. My mother even said that,
in order to put my best foot forward, I had to be patient, alert and excruciatingly
well-mannered. To prove that I belonged, I had to show poise and confidence, the ability
to speak well and listen closely. Only then would my peers see that I deserved to be there
as much as they did. Despite this racial stereotyping and the discomfort I often felt, the
learning I gained from other aspects of being at an elite private school were incredibly
valuable.

I was encouraged by my teachers to explore my curiosity, to challenge myself in new ways
and to deepen my understanding of subjects that fascinated me the most. And going to
college was the next step. I was excited to take my intellectual drive and interest in the
world of ideas to the next level. I was eager to engage in lively debate with peers and
professors and with outside speakers; to listen, to learn and gain a deeper understanding
of myself and of others. While I was fortunate to meet peers and professors who were
interested in doing the same thing, my desire to engage with difficult ideas was also met
with resistance. To prepare myself to engage with controversy in the real world, I joined a
group that brought controversial speakers to campus. But many people fiercely opposed this
group, and I received significant pushback from students, faculty and my administration.
For many, it was difficult to see how bringing controversial speakers to campus could be
valuable, when they caused harm.

And it was disappointing to me facing personal attacks, having my administration cancel
speakers and hearing my intentions distorted by those around me. My work also hurt the
feelings of many, and I understood that. Of course, no one likes being offended, and I
certainly don't like hearing controversial speakers argue that feminism has become a war
against men or that blacks have lower IQs than whites. I also understand that some people
have experienced traumatic experiences in their lives. And for some, listening to
offensive views can be like reliving the very traumas that they've worked so hard to
overcome. Many argue that by giving these people a platform, you're doing more harm than
good, and I'm reminded of this every time I listen to these points of view and feel my
stomach turn. Yet, tuning out opposing viewpoints doesn't make them go away, because
millions of people agree with them.

In order to understand the potential of society to progress forward, we need to understand
the counterforces. By engaging with controversial and offensive ideas, I believe that we
can find common ground, if not with the speakers themselves, then with the audiences they
may attract or indoctrinate. Through engaging, I believe that we may reach a better
understanding, a deeper understanding, of our own beliefs and preserve the ability to
solve problems, which we can't do if we don't talk to each other and make an effort to be
good listeners. But soon after I announced that John Derbyshire would be speaking on
campus, student backlash erupted on social media. The tide of resistance, in fact, was so
intense, that my college president rescinded the invitation. I was deeply disappointed by
this because, as I saw it, there would be nothing that any of my peers or I could do to
silence someone who agreed with him in the office environment of our future employers. I
look out at what's happening on college campuses, and I see the anger.

And I get it. But what I wish I could tell people is that it's worth the discomfort, it's
worth listening, and that we're stronger, not weaker, because of it. When I think about my
experiences with uncomfortable learning, and I reflect upon them, I've found that it's
been very difficult to change the values of the intellectual community that I've been a
part of. But I do feel a sense of hope when I think about the individual interactions that
I've been able to have with students who both support the work that I'm doing and who feel
challenged by it and who do not support it. What I've found is that, while it can be
difficult to change the values of a community, we can gain a lot from individual
interactions. While I didn't get to engage with John Derbyshire due to my president's
disinvitation, I was able to have dinner with Charles Murray before his talk. I knew the
conversation would be difficult. And I didn't expect it to be pleasant.

But it was cordial, and I did gain a deeper understanding of his arguments. I found that
he, like me, believed in creating a more just society. The thing is, his understanding of
what justice entailed was very different from my own. The way in which he wanted to
understand the issue, the way in which he wanted to approach the issue of inequality also
differed from my own. And I found that his understanding of issues like welfare and
affirmative action was tied and deeply rooted in his understanding of various libertarian
and conservative beliefs, what diminishes and increases their presence in our society.
While he expressed his viewpoints eloquently, I remained thoroughly unconvinced. But I did
walk away with a deeper understanding. It's my belief that to achieve progress in the face
of adversity, we need a genuine commitment to gaining a deeper understanding of humanity.
I'd like to see a world with more leaders who are familiar with the depths of the views of
those they deeply disagree with, so that they can understand the nuances of everyone
they're representing.

I see this as an ongoing process involving constant learning, and I'm confident that I'll
be able to add value down the line if I continue building empathy and understanding
through engaging with unfamiliar perspectives. Thank you.

<!--
ad_duration=3.33
comment_count=90
event="TED2018"
external_start_time=0
has_talk_citation=1
intro_duration=11.82
is_subtitle_required="False"
is_talk_featured="True"
language="en"
language_swap="False"
native_language="en"
number_of_related_talks=6
number_of_speakers=1
number_of_subtitled_videos=20
number_of_tags=10
number_of_talk_download_languages=20
number_of_talk_more_resources=1
number_of_talk_recommendations=1
number_of_talks_take_actions=3
post_ad_duration=0.83
published_timestamp="2018-04-19 14:53:35"
recording_date="2018-04-10"
speaker_description="Crusader for dialogue"
speaker_is_published=1
speaker_name="Zachary R. Wood"
talk_name="Why it's worth listening to people you disagree with"
talk_recommendations_blurb="More resources curated by Zachary R. Wood"
talks_tags=["politics","activism","social-change","humanity","society","communication","community","collaboration","empathy","race"]
url_audio="https://download.ted.com/talks/ZacharyRWood_2018.mp3?apikey=acme-roadrunner"
url_photo_speaker="https://pe.tedcdn.com/images/ted/f3b614f634942912b0b58075a15bdf5092c6bd22_254x191.jpg"
url_photo_talk="https://s3.amazonaws.com/talkstar-photos/uploads/c4fabe74-e842-4c23-9bbb-7169cda9bd48/ZacharyRWood_2018-embed.jpg"
url_webpage="https://www.ted.com/talks/zachary_r_wood_why_it_s_worth_listening_to_people_you_disagree_with"
video_type_name="TED Stage Talk"
-->